1 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Examination Syllabus 
 
(Valid from 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 
THE INSTITUTE OF BREWING AND DISTILLING 
 
 
THE DIPLOMA IN DISTILLING QUALIFICATION 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (IBD) is a me mbers’ organisation dedicated 
to the education and training needs of brewers and distillers and those in related 
industries. It does this by offering a range of int ernationally recognised 
qualifications and the training to support them, ei ther through direct instruction or 
by distance learning. 
 
The Mission Statement of the Institute of Brewing &  Distilling (IBD) is ”To be 
recognized as the world’s leading members organizat ion for the advancement of 
education and training in the science and technolog y of brewing, distilling and 
related industries”.  Consistent with the achieveme nt of this objective is the 
requirement for the means of assessing the levels o f knowledge, understanding 
and competence of those educated and trained.  The method of assessment is 
by examination and the Institute operates three levels of examination. 
 
The Distilling Qualifications have been offered sin ce 1994 and there are three 
levels. The first level is the Fundamentals of Dist illing – a new qualification aimed 
at those not directly involved in the production pr ocess, but wishing to learn more 
about the fundamentals of distilling. 
 
The second level is the General Certificate in Dist illing, (GCD), offered to 
candidates since 2001. This examination is a measur e of the basic knowledge, 
both theoretical and practical underpinning distill ing. It is aimed at team 
members, team leaders and technicians. It can be th e first step on the ladder of 
professional development, leading to the Diploma in  Distilling or it may be an end 
in itself. It is also a useful qualification for ot her distillery personnel, for example 
in HR, finance, logistics and engineering, who will  benefit from a better 
understanding of distilling operations. The syllabu s covers the three main 
substrates used in distilling: cereals, molasses an d grape and therefore has 
international appeal. 
 
The third and, currently, top level of distilling q ualifications is the Diploma in 
Distilling. This syllabus has been written to expan d the distilling qualification to 
cover the main substrates for potable spirits: cere als, molasses and grapes, and 
the qualification requires an understanding of all three.  The Diploma provides 
team leaders, operational managers and technicians with the theoretical 
knowledge that enables them to perform better, impr oving the basis on which 
decisions are taken. Although the examination has been offered since 1994, it  
3 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
has now been given a truly international perspectiv e and covers the basic 
underlying theory for the production of most potable spirits. 
 
 
ADVICE TO CANDIDATES  
 
The syllabus of each Module is divided into units, which cover a topic area. Each 
unit is then sub-divided into elements and there ma y be several elements 
covering the science and technology associated with  this unit.  Each element 
then has text associated with it to describe the le vel of detail required. Thus the 
syllabus is presented in considerable detail and ca ndidates are advised to use it 
as a revision tool and to tick off each element as part of their examination 
preparation. 
  
Virtually the whole syllabus is covered by a concis e reading list available 
separately from The Institute of Brewing & Distilling. 
 
Unless otherwise stated, candidates are expected to  achieve a detailed 
understanding of a topic; consistent with the objec tives of the examination.  The 
adjectives “basic” and “outline” are used when a le sser depth of knowledge is 
required. 
 
“The basic concept of …” means the ability to expla in all the major principles, 
functions or purpose relevant to the topic, without  the need to describe its 
intricacies. 
 
“An outline of …” means a summary description of th e scientific principles, plant 
or process concerned. 
 
Where there are references in the syllabus to chemi cal compounds, candidates 
are expected to know the scientific principles and significance of their role in the 
process.  Knowledge of complex formulae and advance d chemistry is not 
required. 
 
Where there are references in the syllabus to mathe matical equations & simple 
calculations, candidates are expected to use straig htforward mathematics in the 
specified applications relevant to distillery opera tions.  Commitment to memory 
of complex equations and formulae is not required.  However, candidates are 
expected to know the basic formulae, which govern key scientific principles. 
 
Candidates are strongly advised to acquire an experienced Mentor for their 
period of study, capable of providing the initial advice on minimum scientific 
comprehension (as indicated in the above definitions), followed by general 
direction, support and assessment of progress through a Module.  
4 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 
EXAMINATION DETAILS 
 
Qualification to sit the Diploma in Distilling is M embership of the Institute of 
Brewing & Distilling. 
 
The three Modules may be sat in any order, and ther e are no time limits for 
sitting one or all of the Modular Examinations. 
 
 
REGISTRATION FOR EXAMINATION 
 
The Diploma in Distilling examination takes place in June of each year. 
 
Candidates must register with the Institute by 1st December of the previous year.  
Registration fees and any special conditions are pu blished regularly in the 
Institute's publications. 
 
 
ISSUE OF CERTIFICATED QUALIFICATIONS  
 
The Institute of Brewing & Distilling will separate ly certificate each Module, with 
success in all three Module Examinations qualifying  for the use of post nominals, 
“Dipl.Distil.”  Successful candidates will receive a Diploma in Brewing certificate. 
 
 
 
CONTACT FOR ENQUIRIES 
 
The Examinations Department 
The Institute of Brewing & Distilling 
33 Clarges Street 
London W1J 7EE 
 
Tel: 020 7499 8144 
Fax: 020 7499 1156 
E-mail: exams@ibd.org.uk 
Website: www.ibd.org.uk  
 
 
 
5 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
DIPLOMA IN DISTILLING EXAMINATION SYLLABUS 
 
 
MODULE 1   MATERIALS AND FERMENTABLE EXTRACT  Page 
 
MODULE 1A   RAW MATERIALS & PREPARATION OF CEREAL WORT 
  
Unit 1A.1 Barley        8 
 1A.2  Cereals and Enzymes used in Processing Cerea ls for Grain Whisky 
  and Grain Neutral Spirit     9 
 1A.3 Malting       9 
 1A.4 Malt Processing in the Distillery    11 
 1A.5 Mashing in Malt Whisky Distilleries   12 
 1A.6 Cooking and Mashing in Grain Distilleries  12  
 1A.7 Water        13 
 1A.8 Laboratory Analysis      13 
 
MODULE 1B   PREPARATION OF MOLASSES WORT 
 
Unit 1B.1 Sugar Sources      15 
 1B.2 Processing of Molasses to Wort    17 
 1B.3 Laboratory Analysis      16 
 
MODULE 1C   PREPARATION OF GRAPE MUST 
 
Unit 1C.1 Structure and Morphology of Grapes   19 
1C.2 Growth Factors and Biochemical Changes in the  19 
Maturation of Grapes   
 1C.3 Harvesting       19 
 1C.4  Destemming/Destalking and Pressing   19 
 1C.5 Treatment and Composition of Must   19 
 1C.6 Pitching of Yeast/ Spontaneous Fermentation  20 
 1C.7 Laboratory Analysis      20 
 
MODULE 2  FERMENTATION, DISTILLATION & MATURATION  
 
Unit 2.1 Properties of Yeast      21 
2.2 Yeast Metabolism      21 
2.3 Fermentation       22 
2.4 Hygiene       23 
2.5 Pot Distillation      23 
2.6 Continuous Distillation     24 
2.7 Post-distillation Modification of Flavour   25 
2.8 Quality       26 
6 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
MODULE 3  PROCESS TECHNOLOGY    Page 
 
Unit 3.1 Distillation       27 
3.2 Heat Transfer      28 
3.3 Energy       29 
3.4 Effluents and Co-products     29 
3.5 Fluid Flow       30 
3.6 Materials of Construction     31 
3.7 Instrumentation and Process Control   32  
3.8 Packaging Processes     33 
3.9 Health and Safety      34 
 
7 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
 
Diploma in Distilling Qualification 
 
  
Module 1:  Preparation of Fermentable Extract 
 1A:  Cereal wort 
 1B:  Molasses wort 
 1C:  Grapes must 
 
Module 2:  Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation 
 
Module 3:  Process Technology 
 
 
 
Each module is examined by a 3-hour examination:   
Module 1:  Multiple choice paper, 1 hour, covering an overview of all three 
substrates - cereal, molasses and grape - for potable distilled spirit 
production.   
Then a 2-hour essay paper, answering 4 questions ou t of 6 from one only of 
the syllabii 1A, 1B or 1C; a choice of cereal, mola sses or grape substrates. 
 
Module 2:  3-hour essay paper, answering 6 question s out of 8 from a single 
syllabus. 
 
Module 3:  3-hour essay paper, answering 6 question s out of 8 from a single 
syllabus. 
 
 
8 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
MODULE 1  
 Contents:   Module 1A Raw Materials and Preparation of Cereal Wort 
           Module 1B Preparation of Molasses Wort 
           Module 1C Preparation of Grape Must 
 
Module 1A: RAW MATERIALS AND PREPARATION OF CEREAL WORT  
Unit 1A.1  Barley 
1A.1.1 The Physiology and Morphology of Barley  
 1A.1.1.1. Barley plant development 
 1A.1.1.2. Barley fertilization 
 1A.1.1.3. Two- and Six-rowed barley 
 1A.1.1.4. Barley grain development post-fertilizat ion 
 1A.1.1.5. Structure of the barley grain 
 1A.1.1.6. Composition of cereal grains 
 
1A.1.2 Environmental and Agronomic Factors influencing the Growth of Barley  
 1A.1.2.1. Climate 
 1A.1.2.2. Soil 
 1A.1.2.3. Soil nutrients 
 1A.1.2.4. Crop competitors – weeds, pests and dise ases 
  
1A.1.3 Harvesting and Storage of Barley  
 1A.1.3.1. Moisture at harvesting 
 1A.1.3.2. Barley drying 
 1A.1.3.3. Barley storage 
 
1A.1.4 Dormancy  
 1A.1.4.1. Reasons for dormancy 
 1A.1.4.2. Mechanism of dormancy 
 1A.1.4.3. Barrier effects of seed coats 
 1A.1.4.4. Effects of light on dormancy 
 1A.1.4.5. Presence and absence of inhibitors 
 1A.1.4.6. Shifts in oxidative pathways 
 1A.1.4.7. Genetic controls 
 1A.1.4.8. Overcoming dormancy 
 1A.1.4.9. Types of dormancy   
 
1A.1.5 Water Sensitivity  
 
1A.1.6 Principles of barley breeding and selection for malting  
 1A.1.6.1. Traditional barley breeding 
 1A.1.6.2. Mutations 
 1A.1.6.3. Acceptance of new barley varieties 
 1A.1.6.4. Breeding assisted by molecular biology t echniques 
9 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
Unit 1A.2   Cereals and Enzymes used in Processing Cereals for Grain Whisky and  
                   Grain Neutral Spirit 
1A.2.1 General Specifications  
 
1A.2.2 Maize  
 
1A.2.3 Wheat  
 
1A.2.4 Rye  
 
1A.2.5 Barley  
 
1A.2.6 Enzymes for GNS Production and Non – Scotch Whisky  
 
Unit 1A.3  Malting 
1A.3.1 Evaluation of Barley for Malting  
 1A.3.1.1. Characteristics of malting barley 
- Variety 
- Germinability 
- Nitrogen (Protein) content 
- Grain size 
- Dormancy 
- Endosperm structure and cell wall composition 
- Pre-germination 
- Husk content 
1A.3.1.2. Methods for assessing the quality of barley 
- Micro-malting 
- Germinative energy 
- Water sensitivity test 
- Germinative capacity 
- Tetrazolium viability test 
- Extract potential 
- Regularity principle (Bishop’s equation) 
 
1A.3.2 Barley Intake and Preparation for Malting  
 1A.3.2.1. Barley intake, sampling and testing 
 1A.3.2.2. Preparation of barley for malting 
- Barley separation 
- Barley grading 
 
1A.3.3 The Malting Process – Conversion of Barley i nto Malt  
 1A.3.3.1. Overview of the three phases of malting 
10 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 1A.3.3.2. The Malting Process – Steeping and Grain  Hydration 
  1A.3.3.2.1. Steeping technology 
  1A.3.3.2.2. Steeping systems and air rests 
   -      Systems for setting up steep regimes 
   -      Multiple steeping and evenness of germina tion & modification  
   -      Initiation of germination 
   -      Air rest temperature 
   -      Steeping cycles 
   -      Monitoring of steeping 
   -      After steeping 
   
  1A.3.3.2.3. Factors influencing water uptake 
   -      Temperature 
   -      Grain size 
   -      Protein content 
   -      Grain viability 
   -      Variety and crop year 
 
 1A.3.3.3. The Malting Process – Germination and En dosperm Modification 
   -       Gibberellin synthesis 
   -       Enzymes and substrates involved in endos perm modification 
   -       Cell wall β-glucans and pentosans 
   -       Endosperm protein and proteolysis 
   -       Starch granules and granule modification  
  1A.3.3.3.1. Germination technology 
   -       Specifications for germination vessels 
   -       Turning the grain 
 
  1A.3.3.3.2. Germination control parameters 
   -       Moisture control 
   -       Effect of moisture on modification 
   -       Effects of temperature on germination 
   -       Effects of temperature on enzyme develop ment 
   -       Effects of temperature on rate of modifi cation 
   -       Air-on and air-off temperatures 
   -       Control of temperature 
   -       Effects of high summer temperatures 
   
  1A.3.3.3.3. Physiological and Biochemical changes  which influence  
                                           malting loss    
   -       α-Amylase 
   -       β-Amylase 
   -       Proteolysis 
   -       Solubilization and breakdown of β-glucans 
 
  1A.3.3.3.4. Control of malting loss 
11 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 1A.3.3.4. The Malting Process – Kilning 
  1A.3.3.4.1. Purpose of kilning 
 
  1A.3.3.4.2. The physical process of kilning 
   -       Free drying 
   -       Forced drying 
   -       Peated malt and peating technology 
 
  1A.3.3.4.3. Kiln design and technology 
   -       Energy consumption 
   -       Modern kilning technology 
   -       Indirect and direct kiln firing 
 
  1A.3.3.4.4. Kilning biochemistry 
   -       Enzyme denaturation 
   -       Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) 
  
 
Unit 1A.4  Malt Processing in the Distillery 
1A.4.1 Malt Performance – Requirements of Good Qual ity Malt  
- General quality parameters (malt distilling and high diastase malts) 
- Malt specifications 
- Effect of barley variety on malt quality 
 
1A.4.2 Key Malt Analytical Parameters  
- Moisture 
- Friability and homogeneity 
- Soluble extract 
- Fermentability  
- Fermentable extract 
- Predicted spirit yield (PSY) 
- Total soluble nitrogen 
- Malt enzyme levels 
-   
1A.4.3  Malt Delivery and Handling  
 1A.4.3.1. Malt Delivery Procedures  
 
 1A.4.3.2. Malt Intake 
  -     Sampling 
  -     Storage 
  -     Screening/Grading and Dressing 
 
 1A.4.3.3. Safety Concerns (Dust)  
12 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.4.4  Milling  
 1A.4.4.1. Purpose of  Milling 
- Mill types 
1A.4.4.2. Comminution  
1A.4.4.3. Influence of friability on Milling 
1A.4.4.4. Milling operations 
- Compression and shear 
- Mechanism of grain destruction 
1A.4.4.5. Grist evaluation 
- Grist analyses 
1A.4.4.6. Milling safety 
 
 
Unit 1A.5  Mashing in Malt Whisky Distilleries  
1A.5.1  Mashing Procedures  
  
1A.5.2  The Principles an Purpose of Mashing  
  
1A.5.3  Calculation of Mash Tun Extract in a Malt Distillery  
  
1A.5.4  The Principles and Purpose of Mash Separation  
- Traditional Mash Tun 
- Semi – Lauter and Lauter Tun 
- Mash Filter 
 
1A.5.5  Spent Grain Discharge  
 
1A.5.6  Prevention of Microbial Contamination    
 
1A.5.7  Preservation of Enzyme Activity in Wort  
 
1A.5.8  Wort Properties  
 
1A.5.9  Wort Cooling and Aeration  
 
Unit 1A.6  Cooking and Mashing in Grain Distilleries  
1A.6.1  Preparation of Wort from a Mash Bill high in Unmalted Cereal, with a small  
              proportion of Malted Barley  
  
1A.6.2  Preparation of Wort from 100% Unmalted Cereal and Microbial Enzymes  
 1A.6.2.1. The Selection of Exogenous Enzymes 
- Alpha-Amylase 
- Amyloglucosidase (glucoamylase) 
- Pullulanase (debranching enzyme or limit dextrinase in malt) 
- Protease 
- Other activities 
13 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.6.3  Cereal Cooking   
- Batch cooking 
- Continuous cooking 
- Cooling after cooking  
 
 
Unit 1A.7  Water 
1A.7.1 Basic Quality Requirements of Water  
 
1A.7.2 Production Requirements of Water n Distilleries  
  
1A.7.3 Water Sourcing  
- Borehole water 
- Surface water 
  
1A.7.4 The Principal Characteristics and Requirements of a Distillery Water Supply  
- Production (Mashing) water 
- Product water 
- Process water 
- Service water 
- Boiler water 
-  Cooling tower water 
- Cooling towers – Legionella  risk 
- General cleaning water 
 
1A.7.5 Water Usage Ratios, Conservation Methods and Costs  
 
1A.7.6 Water Treatments 
 
 
 
 
Unit 1A.8  Laboratory analysis 
1A.8.1  Basic concepts  
- Sampling error     
- Accuracy and precision 
- Repeatability (r)    
- Reproducibility (R) 
- Specification ranges (tolerances) 
   -  Simple probability calculations: 
   - Normal distributions    
- Standard deviation 
   - Variance 
  -     The relevance of inter-laboratory collabora tive checks 
 
14 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.8.2  Analytical Techniques   
- Malt hot water extract 
- Total nitrogen 
-  Total soluble nitrogen  
- Free alpha amino nitrogen 
- Moisture 
- Friability 
- Diastatic power 
- Fermentability 
- Fermentable extract 
- Predicted spirit yield (PSY) 
    
 
 
END OF MODULE 1A 
15 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
Unit 1B.1 Sugar Sources 
1B.1.1 Sources of Molasses for the Distiller 
 The different sources for the supply of molasses f or the distiller 
  Sugar Cane  Sugar Beet 
  Sugar Palm  Citrus Pulp 
  Sweet Sorghum (Syrup) 
 Geographical spread of molasses production 
 
1B.1.2 Sugar Cane 
1B.1.2.1Environmental and Agronomic Factors influencing the  Growth of Sugar 
Cane  
 Tropical and sub-tropical varieties of sugar cane 
  S accharum. officinarum 
  Saccharum  barberi 
  Saccharum  spontaneum 
 Principles of breeding and commercial breeding met hods   
Climate 
 Soil 
 Fertilisers 
 Irrigation 
Expected plant life 
 
1B.1.2.2 Harvesting of Sugar Cane  
 Factors affecting the decision when to harvest 
Harvesting techniques 
Factors affecting sugar yield 
Disposal route for by-products e.g bagasse  
 
1B.1.2.3 Processing of Sugar Cane to Raw Sugar and Molasses  
 The basic principles of the extraction process  
 Removal of plant materials by clarification and fi ltration 
First, Second and Blackstrap molasses 
 Yield of raw sugar and molasses 
 Market factors influencing the composition of mola sses 
High test molasses 
Storage of molasses 
 
1B.1.3 Sugar Beet 
1B.1.3.1Environmental and Agronomic Factors influencing the  Growth of Sugar 
Beet  
 Principles of breeding and commercial breeding methods   
Climate 
 Soil 
 Fertilisers 
 Irrigation 
16 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 
1B1.3.2 Harvesting of Sugar Beet  
 Factors affecting the decision when to harvest 
Harvesting techniques 
Factors affecting sugar yield 
Disposal route for by-products e.g. animal feed pellets. 
 
1B.1.3.3 Processing of Sugar Beet to Molasses  
 The basic principles of the extraction process  
 Yield of molasses 
 Factors influencing the composition of molasses 
 Suitability for potable alcohol production 
 Process energy efficiency compared to sugar cane m olasses. 
 
1B.1.4 Sweet Sorghum 
1B.1.4.1Environmental and Agronomic Factors influencing the Growth of Sweet 
Sorghum  
 Principles of breeding and commercial breeding methods 
  Sorghum bicolor (L) Moench   
Climate 
 Soil 
 Fertilisers 
 Irrigation 
 
1B1.4.2 Harvesting of Sweet Sorghum  
 Factors affecting the decision when to harvest 
Harvesting techniques 
Factors affecting sugar yield 
Disposal route for by-products e.g. ensilage as animal feed. 
 
1B.1.4.3 Processing of Sweet Sorghum to Sorghum Syrup  
 The basic principles of the extraction process  
 Yield of jaggery/gur and syrup 
 Factors influencing the composition of syrup 
 
1B.1.5 Sugar Palm 
1B.1.5.1Environmental and Agronomic Factors influencing the  Growth of Sugar 
Palm  
Species and geographic occurance 
  Arenga pinnata  Borassus flabellifer    
Climate 
 Life cycle 
 
1B1.5.2 Harvesting of Sugar Palm  
 Harvesting techniques e.g tapping 
Factors affecting sugar yield 
17 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 
1B.1.5.3 Processing of Sugar Palm to  Syrup/Molasses  
 The basic principles of the extraction process  
 Yield of jaggery/gur and syrup 
 Factors influencing the composition of syrup 
 
1B.1.6 Citrus Pulp 
 1.B.1.6.1 Origin of Citrus Pulp  
 Occurrence and availability 
 Alternative and competing uses of citrus pulp 
 
 1B.1.6.2 Processing of Citus Pulp to Molasses  
 The basic principles of the extraction process  
 Yield 
 Factors influencing the composition of syrup 
 By-products e.g. d-limonene 
 
Unit 1B.2 Processing of Molasses to Wort 
1B.2.1 Composition of molasses and its relevance to the distiller  
 Main sugars present 
 Measurement by hydrometer and analysis method to m easure sugars present  
The importance of storage temperature on viscosity 
 
1B.2.2 Microbiological spoilage organisms in molasses  
 Typical microorganisms found in molasses 
 Effect of these microorganisms on the processing o f molasses 
 Effects on the final spirit of molasses infection 
 
1B.2.3 Molasses pre-treatment  
 Removal of solids and scale to prevent equipment d amage 
  Plant material  Dissolved salts - gypsum 
 Dilution to the required °Brix for fermentation 
 Addition of yeast nutrients 
  Diammonium phosphate Ammonium sulphate  
  Why urea should not be used – ethyl carbamate for mation 
 Adjustment of acidity level 
 Pasteurisation or sterilisation 
 
1B.2.4 Pitching of yeast/bacteria   
 Light rums – Selected strain of Saccharomyces cerevisae 
 Dark Rums  – Spontaneous fermentation by yeast and bacteria 
Spontaneous fermentation supplemented by old stillage (“dunder”) 
Selected strain of Saccharomyces cerevisae 
   Selected strain of Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
Selected strain of the bacterium Clostridium saccharobutyricum  or 
another suitable bacterium  
18 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
  
1B.3  Laboratory Analysis 
1B.3.1 Basic Concepts  
 The basic concepts applied to the interpretation o f analytical data 
  Sampling error  Accuracy and Precision 
  Repeatability ( r )  Reproducibility ( R )  
  Specification Range (tolerances) 
 Simple probability calculations 
  Normal distribution  Standard deviation 
  Variance 
 The relevance of inter-laboratory collaborative ch ecks. 
 
1B.3.2  Analytical techniques  
 The principals analytical techniques for :- 
  Sugar content by hydrometer 
  Sugar content by Lane Eynon method 
  Total sugars as invert – TSAI 
  Total sugars as Sucrose – TSAS 
  Total Sweetening matter - TSM 
  Acidity 
  Nitrogen 
  Dry Matter content 
 
 
 
END OF MODULE 1B 
19 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
Module 1C: Preparation of Grape Must  
 
Unit1C.1 Structure and morphology of grapes  
Vitis Vinifera – botanical name and suitability for wine making . 
Structure of the gape and grape vine 
Stages of development of the plant through to harvesting.   
 
Unit 1C.2 Growth factors and biochemical changes in the maturation of grapes  
 Influence of the following:- 
  Legal requirements:- 
   Geographical areas. e.g Protected Designation of  Origin (PDO) 
   Appelation d’Origin Controllee (AOC) etc. 
   Varieties 
   Viticultural practices 
   Yields 
   Permitted treatments 
  Viticultural practices  
  Climate – for growing and for harvest 
  Soil  
  Disease and pest control 
 Biochemical changes occurring during grape maturat ion. 
 
Unit 1C.3 Harvesting  
 Evaluation of grapes for harvesting 
 Determination of harvest timing 
 Methods used for harvesting. 
 Advantages and disadvantages of various methods 
 Factors influencing grape/must quality during harv esting. 
 Choice of treatments  
 
Unit 1C.4 Destemming/destalking and pressing  
 Methods used for destemming and pressing 
 Advantages and disadvantages of various methods 
 Factors influencing grape must yield and quality. 
 By-products and their potential use. 
 
Unit 1C.5 Treatment and composition of must  
 Main types of treatment that might be used and rea sons for their use:- 
  Solids removal 
  Sulphiting  
  Enzymes 
  Chaptalisation/acidification 
  Yeast nutrient addition (see also Unit 1C.6) 
 
20 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 Types of must analyses 
 Typical values for must composition 
 Interpreting results 
 Examples of reasons for variation in must composit ion 
 Methods for changing must composition 
 
Unit 1C.6 Pitching of yeast/ spontaneous fermentation  
 Spontaneous fermentation by yeast and bacteria 
 Advantages and disadvantages of spontaneous fermen tation 
 Examples of yeasts and nature and use of wine yeast cultures  
 Packaging and storage conditions for yeast 
 Method of addition 
 Yeast additives/nutrients 
 Advantages and disadvantages of fermentation from pitched yeast  
 
Unit 1C.7 Laboratory Analysis  
1C.7.1 Basic Concepts  
 The basic concepts applied to the interpretation o f analytical data 
  Sampling error  Accuracy and Precision 
  Repeatability ( r )  Reproducibility ( R )  
  Specification Range (tolerances) 
  Simple probability calculations 
  Normal distribution  Standard deviation 
  Variance 
 The relevance of inter-laboratory collaborative ch ecks. 
 
1C.7.2  Analytical techniques  
 The principal analytical techniques for :- 
  Sugar content by hydrometer 
  Sugar content by Lane Eynon method 
  Total sugars as invert – TSAI 
  Total sugars as Sucrose – TSAS 
  Total Sweetening matter - TSM 
  Acidity 
  Nitrogen 
  Dry Matter content 
 
END OF MODULE 1C  
 
END OF MODULE 1 
 
  
   
  
  
 
21 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
MODULE 2  
 
Module 2:   FERMENTATION, DISTILLATION & MATURATION 
 
Unit 2.1  Properties of Yeast  
2.1.1 Yeast morphology  
 The principal organelles of the yeast cell and the ir functions: 
  cell wall   nucleus 
  cytoplasm              plasma membrane 
mitochondrion   vacuole 
 Mechanism of reproduction by budding 
 
2.1.2 Characteristics of culture yeasts  
 Principles of yeast classification 
  concept of genus and species  cell and spore morp hology 
  fermentation and aerobic growth tests 
 Identification of Saccharomyces cerevisiae  and yeasts of natural fermentations 
 Tests to distinguish strains of S. cerevisiae 
  growth on various carbon compounds (e.g. API tests ) 
  resistance to inhibitors  immunological reactions  
 Use of small-scale (e.g. tall-tube) fermentations for evaluating yeasts 
Principles of commercial yeast propagation 
 
2.1.3  Genetic characteristics of yeast  
 Outline of genetic tests for typing or classifying  yeasts (e.g. DNA fingerprinting) 
 Principles of classical hybridisation and genetic manipulation 
 
Unit 2.2  Yeast Metabolism 
2.2.1  Carbohydrate metabolism  
The principal carbohydrates in wort/must utilised by distilling yeasts 
 Mechanisms for transporting carbohydrate through t he cell wall and membrane 
 Emben-Meyerhof-Parnas metabolic pathway 
  conversion of hexose to pyruvate and glycerol (de tailed knowledge of  
   individual enzymes is not required) 
  recycling of NAD by production of acetaldehyde, C O 2 and ethanol (yeast)  
   or lactic acid (homolactic bacteria) 
  generation of energy as ATP 
 Aerobic and anaerobic carbohydrate metabolism 
  oxidative metabolism of glucose (detailed knowled ge of the enzymes of   
   the Krebs cycle is not required)  
  importance of mitochondria in aerobic metabolism    
  effect of concentration of fermentable sugar (Pas teur and Crabtree effects)  
 Significance of pyruvate as a precursor of other k ey metabolites 
 Significance of glycerol in NAD/NADH + balance  
 Significance of the pentose-phosphate pathway 
 Theoretical yield of ethanol and CO 2 
22 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 
2.2.2  Production of flavour compounds  
 The biochemical mechanisms for production of: 
  the principal higher alcohols and esters 
  the principal organic acids, including fatty acid s 
  diacetyl 
  volatile sulphur compounds (dimethyl sulphide, H 2S)  
 
2.2.3  Nutritional requirements of yeast  
 The sources of carbon, nitrogen, salts, metal ions  and growth factors 
 Their importance for healthy yeast growth and ferm entation 
 The role of molecular oxygen 
  purity requirements of air 
 Components of wort which are not utilised by yeast  
 
Unit 2.3  Fermentation 
2.3.1  Yeast handling in the distillery  
 Advantages and disadvantages of yeast cake, yeast cream, dried yeast 
 Yeast storage 
 Preparation of yeast for pitching 
Methods for measuring yeast viability and vitality 
  methylene blue and similar redox dyes     acidifi cation power 
 
2.3.2 Principal fermentation variables  
 Typical values, and the reasons for these values, of: 
  wort strength   fermentable carbohydrate 
  total and α− amino N  yeast concentration 
  alcohol strength of wash pH 
  temperature, especially at pitching  
Effects of these on rate of fermentation and on production of the following flavour 
congeners, and the main reasons for such effects: 
  acetaldehyde 
  the principal higher alcohols and esters 
  the principal organic acids, including fatty acid s 
  vicinal diketones 
  dimethyl sulphide, H 2S and other volatile sulphur compounds 
Changes in these parameters during fermentation  
The effects of different fermentation times 
 The basis of alcohol sensitivity and tolerance in yeast 
  
2.3.3  Fermentation technology  
 Basic principles of design and operation of 
  a traditional wooden washback/fermenter 
  a modern stainless steel washback/fermenter 
 Basic principles of control of fermentation 
23 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 
Unit 2.4   Hygiene 
2.4.1  Plant cleanliness and sterility  
 Cleanliness/sterility requirements of different st ages of the process 
Influence of process plant surfaces : cast iron, copper, stainless steel, wood 
 Importance of design features of pipework and fitt ings 
 Principles of layout and operation of a cleaning-i n-place system 
 The range and main constituents of cleaning and st erilising agents 
Safety requirements for handling detergents and sanitisers (e.g. COSSH)  
Advantages and disadvantages of hot vs cold sterilisation 
 Detection and quantification of residual surface c ontamination: 
  visual inspection  rinse sampling 
  swab sampling   bioluminescence sampling  
 
2.4.2  Types of spoilage organism  
Micro-organisms which can spoil wort/must and fermentation, their origin and 
effects: 
  Acetobacter and  Gluconobacter 
  Escherichia and  Enterobacter 
  Lactobacillus  and other lactic acid bacteria: good and bad effects 
  Obesumbacterium and  Zymomonas  
  Wild yeasts 
 Factors affecting their ability to grow in wort/mu st or during fermentation 
 
2.4.3  Detection methods  
 The principles of detection and quantification of the above micro-organisms by: 
  microscopical examination  plate counts 
  selective media   membrane filtration 
aerobic, high-CO 2 or anaerobic cultivation 
  rapid methods: bioluminescence, conductance, poly merase chain reaction 
 
Unit 2.5  Pot Distillation  
2.5.1 Ethanol profiles  
 Ethanol profile of wash still distillation 
 Ethanol profile of spirit still distillation 
 Determination of heads/foreshots :spirit, spirit :feints/tails and end cut points 
 Importance of optimising ethanol recovery 
 
2.5.2 Congener behaviour  
 Types of congener: 
  more volatile than ethanol  similar volatility to  ethanol 
  less volatile than ethanol 
 Recovery in wash distillation or loss in stillage 
 Recovery in spirit distillation: 
  in spirit, foreshots and feints  loss in spent le es 
 Effect of changes in spirit still cut points 
24 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 Removal of congeners from the system  
  in stillage  as deposits in receiver vessels 
 
2.5.3 Pre-distillation influences on quality  
 Water supply      
Raw materials 
 Culture yeast(s) and fermentation 
 Microbial infection 
 
2.5.4 Still operation  
 Wash still operation 
  control of frothing   cleaning of heating surface s 
  control of ethyl carbamate production 
 Spirit still operation: distillation of foreshots,  spirit and feints, cut points 
 Operation of standard double and triple distillati on 
 Balanced and unbalanced operation 
  reasons for balanced or unbalanced operation 
  effects on ethanol and congener levels in LW/F re ceiver 
Use of hydrometers in the spirit safe 
 Duration of wash and spirit distillations 
 
2.5.5 Effects of copper  
 Thermal degradations and the role of copper, inclu ding reflux and the effect on  
 spirit quality  
Aspect ratios in still design and the effect on spirit quality 
 Removal of sulphur compounds by reaction with copp er 
 
Unit 2.6  Continuous Distillation  
2.6.1 Ethanol profiles  
 Wash strength 
 Ethanol profile in the rectifier column 
 Control of reflux ratio 
 Control of distillate concentration  
 Legal ethanol concentrations for grain whisky spir it and neutral spirit (UK/EU) 
 
2.6.2 Congener distribution  
 Types of congener: 
  more volatile than ethanol 
  higher or lower volatility than ethanol according  to ethanol concentration 
  less volatile than ethanol 
 High volatile congeners in spirit and heads stream s 
 Low volatile congeners in spent wash 
 Intermediate volatility congeners: 
  profile of congeners in rectifier column 
  take-off in spirit and fusel oil streams 
 Recycling of hot and cold feints 
25 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 Recovery of fusel oil from rectifier column and re cycling of ethanol 
  by decanter   by fusel-oil still 
 
2.6.3 Still operation  
 Wash strength, reflux ratio and distillate strengt h 
  maintenance of steady-state conditions 
Start-up and close-down procedures 
 Redistillation of spirit below specification 
 
2.6.4 Pre-distillation influences on quality  
 Water supply 
 Raw materials – cereals, molasses, grape 
 Culture yeast and fermentation 
 Microbial infection 
 Influence of copper in column stills (need for sac rificial copper in stainless steel  
 stills 
 
Unit 2.7  Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
2.7.1 Basic concepts of maturation  
 Characteristics of new and mature spirit 
 Immature characteristics to be removed 
reductive and subtractive effects 
 Desirable mature attributes 
additive and productive reactions during maturation 
  
2.7.2 Principal factors involved in maturation  
 Cask type 
 Spirit strength 
 Storage conditions, especially temperature and hum idity 
 Effect of atmospheric oxygen 
 
2.7.3 Properties of oak wood  
 Physical properties: low porosity, internal struct ure, resistance to cracking 
 Effects of arboriculture and seasoning 
 Chemical composition, especially cellulose, hemice llulose, lignin, tannin 
 Comparison of chemical and physical properties of American and European oaks 
 
2.7.4 Cask types and properties  
 Manufacture of new casks 
 Refill casks 
  effect of previous use  rejuvenation of casks for  re-use 
 Matching of spirit to cask 
   
2.7.5 General nature of maturation changes  
 Physical effects: 
  evaporation, absorption, extraction 
  ambient temperature and humidity 
26 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 Chemical effects: 
  principal wood compounds involved in maturation 
  addition, subtraction and substitution changes 
  alcohol strength, state of wood surface, amount o f extractives 
 
2.7.6    Non-matured spirits: gin and vodka  
 Quality standards of feedstock for gin and vodka production 
Botanicals for distilled gin 
 Operation of gin still 
 Recovery of gin feints for re-use 
 Preparation and use of essences for non-distilled gin  
 Purification of spirit for vodka 
  hydro-extractive distillation  carbon filtration 
 
Unit 2.8  Quality  
2.8.1 Laboratory analytical techniques  
 Alcohol content    
 Volatile congeners by GLC 
 Non-volatile congeners by HPLC (or TLC if appropri ate)  
 Phenols and tannins 
 Nitrosodimethylamine   
 Ethyl carbamate and its precursor  
 Dimethyl sulphide and polysulphides  
 Colour of matured spirits 
 
2.8.2  Sensory Analyses   
 The basic facilities necessary to conduct nosing tests  
 The procedure, typical applications and methods of  reporting:   
  difference tests (triangle, paired comparisons, d uo-trio, A or not-A, two  
   out of five) 
  descriptive tests (flavour profile, ranking, thre shold) 
 The interpretation of “statistical significance” r esults 
 The role of flavour standards and training in sens ory assessment 
 Sensory analyses for new spirit and matured and no n-matured spirit beverages 
 
2.8.3  Quality Management  
 The difference between Quality Control and Quality  Assurance 
 Basic principles of Quality Assurance concepts, in cluding: 
  international standards, e.g. ISO 9000 series 
  total quality management 
  critical control points and HACCP 
 Basic principles and purpose of laboratory standar ds, e.g. NAMAS 
 
END OF MODULE 2  
27 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
MODULE 3  
 
MODULE 3  PROCESS TECHNOLOGY 
Unit 3.1  Distillation 
3.1.1 Distillation theory  
 Principles of distillation in a single-column stil l 
 Vapour/liquid equilibrium in ethanol/water distill ation 
 Relationship between relative volatility and ethan ol concentration 
 Theoretical plates 
 Multi-plate VLE diagram 
  operating lines    reflux ratio 
  determination of theoretical number of plates (Mc Cabe-Thiele) 
 Deviations from theoretical behaviour 
  incomplete equilibration  condensation and reflux  
 Azeotropes  
 
3.1.2 Design and operation of continuous stills  
 Basic single-column continuous still 
  separate stripping and rectifying sections 
 reflux return from top condenser 
  requirement for wash pre-heating 
  comparison of steam injection and reboiler for he ating 
 Two-column still system for grain whisky spirit an d grain neutral spirit 
  advantages of separate stripping and rectifying c olumns 
  requirement for wash pre-heating 
  control of flow rate and temperature of wash feed  
  transfer of vapour and hot and cold feints betwee n columns 
  spirit strength: legal requirements    
 Multi-column still system for neutral spirit 
  hydro-extractive distillation  recovery of alcoho l/water azeotrope 
  removal of feints and volatile heads  
 Material balance over the distillation process 
 Plate design 
  principal requirements: passage of vapour, but li quid retention 
  number and size of holes: principles for analyser  and rectifier plates 
  downcomers, weirs (seal pots), bubble caps and sa fety valves 
 
3.1.3 Design and operation of pot stills  
 Relationship of still size to mash tun and washbac k capacity 
 Material balance over the distillation process 
Relative size of wash and spirit stills 
 Design and construction of stills: 
  importance of copper 
  still body: shape, filling level, heating arrange ments 
28 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
  still neck: effect of neck design on reflux 
  vapour pipe  slope and implications for reflux 
  additional reflux by neck plates, neck condenser or “purifier” in the vapour 
   pipe 
  relief valves for pressure and vacuum 
 
Unit 3.2   Heat Transfer 
3.2.1   Principles of heat transfer  
 The meaning of specific heat 
 Knowledge of the formula for heat transfer rates a cross heating/cooling surfaces  
  of newtonian fluids under turbulent flow conditio ns 
 Calculations of heat requirements for mashing and distillation 
 Heat exchange calculations between liquids in dist illery applications 
 Conduction of heat:    
  heat transfer calculations across a surface of a vessel 
 Convection of heat: 
  simple heat transfer calculations between two flu ids 
  factors affecting efficiency of heat transfer in boiling and condensation 
 Radiation of heat 
  examples of its importance in distilling 
  the definition of emissivity 
 Simple calculations of heat loss by convection and  radiation 
 
3.2.2 Heating of process liquids  
 Typical heat transfer systems used in mashing 
 Heat transfer and steam supply in cereal cooking 
 Heating of pot stills by 
  direct firing  (coal, gas or oil)    
  simple steam coil 
  steam coil with heating pans 
 Heating of column stills 
  steam injection   
  calandria (reboiler) 
   
3.2.3 Condensation of distillate  
 Advantages and disadvantages of worm, shell-and-tu be and multi-plate   
  condensers 
 Condenser layout and operation 
  single- or multi-pass tube condensers 
  temperature of inlet and outlet water 
  after-cooling of distillate 
 Simple calculations on condensation and cooling of  distillate 
 Efficiency of heat recovery 
 Uses of recovered heat 
 
29 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 
3.2.4 Cooling of wort and spent wash  
 The basic principles of design and operation of he at exchangers for cooling wort,  
 spent wash, pot ale and spent lees  
Typical values in these applications for temperature of liquids in and out, and 
cooling water: hot liquid ratio 
 Simple heat balance calculations 
 
Unit 3.3  Energy 
3.3.1 Combustion  
 The definition of calorific value of fuels 
 Factors that affect the selection of fuels for mal ting and distilling: coal, peat,  
  liquid and gaseous hydrocarbon fuels 
 The derivation of simple mass balances in combusti on 
 Fuel :air ratio 
 Typical composition of flue gas  
  energy recovery from flue gas 
 
3.3.2 Steam raising  
 The meaning of 
  sensible heat  latent heat of vaporisation 
  enthalpy  dry (superheated) steam 
  wet steam 
 Basic principles of design and operation of a fire -tube boiler  
 Principal steam requirements for distillery plant 
  cereal cookers and accumulator pot stills 
  continuous stills   stillage processing 
 Temperature - enthalpy (T-Q) diagram in distillery  operation 
 Simple calculations of enthalpy of steam 
 Steam regeneration  
  thermocompressor   reboiler 
  mechanical vapour recompression 
 
Unit 3.4  Effluents and Co-products 
3.4.1  Effluent composition  
 The meaning, and relevance to distillery effluent,  of: 
  biological oxygen demand    chemical oxygen deman d 
  suspended solids   pH 
 Relative contributions of different departments to  composition of effluent: 
 Typical of: 
  water use in spirit production 
  effluent volume from spirit production 
  BOD and COD (dichromate) of main effluent streams  
  suspended solids of main effluent streams 
  pH and temperature range 
30 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 Effluent analyses 
  BOD,  COD         total suspended solids  
Awareness of official requirements for effluent discharges  
Precautions and requirements for disposal of used detergents/sanitisers 
 
3.4.2  Effluent treatment  
 Calculation of effluent treatment costs (Mogden fo rmula) 
 The basic principles of treatment of effluent disc harges 
  pH control prior to treatment 
  aerobic digestion (biofilters) 
  anaerobic digestion   
spraying on farmland 
  discharge to sea 
 Environmental implications of these methods 
 Removal of copper from effluent  (precipitation, e lectrolysis) 
 
3.4.3  Processing of distillery stillage (pot ale, spent wash )  
Processing of co-products (draff, pomace)  
 Separation of solids and liquid of spent wash  
  decanter centrifuge 
  screw press 
 Factors affecting their capacity to clarify to des ired solids concentration 
 Evaporation: basic principles of 
  natural- and forced-circulation evaporators 
  falling film evaporator 
  multiple effect evaporation 
 Drying of animal feed 
  disc dryer    drum dryer 
  spray dryer   cyclone dryer 
 Energy efficiency in processing 
Separation of useful sub-products – e.g. red colour  from pomace 
Preparation as fodder or fertilizer 
 Preparation as substrate for further distilled pro ducts e.g. marc, orujo, grappa etc. 
 
3.4.4 Carbon dioxide   
 Collection of CO 2 from fermentation vessels 
 Processing of CO 2 
  purity requirements 
  layout of purification plant 
  knowledge of the function of each column 
 
Unit 3.5  Fluid Flow 
3.5.1 Basic characteristics  
 Definition of newtonian and non-newtonian fluids 
  their relevance in the distilling industry 
31 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 Definition of laminar and turbulent flow 
  their relevance in the distilling industry 
  the relevance of Reynolds number                v elocity profiles in pipes 
 The meaning of conservation of mass in liquid flow  
  simple calculations on volume flow, velocity and pipe diameter 
 Conservation of energy in fluid transfer 
  Bernouilli equation    simple energy balance calc ulations 
  examples of energy interchange in fluid transfer 
 
3.5.2 Valves  
 The basic design features, respective merits and t ypical distillery applications of 
 the following types of valve: 
  butterfly   diaphragm 
  gate    globe 
 Design features and applications in distillery pla nt of the following types of valve: 
  pressure relief   pressure reducing 
  anti-vacuum   
 
3.5.3   Design of pipework   
 The concept of pressure drop and Fanning friction factor in pipework systems 
  effect of change of diameter 
  relative effects of bends, valves, T-pieces etc. 
  effect of internal surface roughness 
 The characteristics of product flow most favourabl e to product quality, and the  
 important pipe-run features for water, wash, hot f eints, spirit and whisky 
 
3.5.4 Pumps  
 The factors affecting the power requirement of a p ump 
 The importance of NPSH (net positive suction head)   
 Calculation of power requirements in typical appli cations 
 Basic design features, priming and pumping charact eristics, respective merits and 
 typical  distillery applications of the following pumps: 
  single stage closed impeller centrifugal 
  single stage open impeller centrifugal 
  diaphragm positive displacement 
  lobe rotor 
 
Unit 3.6  Materials of Construction 
3.6.1 Properties of materials  
 The reasons why copper and stainless steel are the  preferred materials for certain 
 items of distillery plant 
 The advantages and disadvantages of the following for distillery applications: 
  wood    copper 
  cast iron   mild steel 
  lined mild steel  stainless steel 
32 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
3.6.2 Stainless steel  
 The principal properties of austenitic stainless s teels 
 The important features of grades AISI  304, 304L, 316 and 316L  
  ingredients   relative corrosion resistance 
  mechanical strength  expansion coefficients 
  heat transfer coefficient relative cost 
Applications where austenitics are unsuitable and duplex or ferritic steels are 
required. 
 
3.6.3 Corrosion  
 The common forms of corrosion in copper, and their  causes 
 The common forms of corrosion in stainless steel, and their causes 
3.6.4 Insulation  
 Principles of effective insulation 
 Typical materials and reasons for their selection for: 
  process streams above ambient temperature 
  process streams below ambient temperature 
 
Unit 3.7  Instrumentation and Process Control 
3.7.1 Essentials of practicable remote measurement  
 Typical conditions that affect selection and sitin g of remote sensors: 
  environmental and safety 
  product composition and temperature 
  cleaning and sterilisation procedures 
  sensor accuracy and repeatability 
  sensor reliability and maintenance requirements 
 
3.7.2 Remote measurement systems  
 The basic principles of design and operation of co mmon forms of remote sensor 
 for measuring:  
  temperature   density/specific gravity 
  flow rate of process fluid liquid level 
  ethanol    pH 
 Recent developments 
 
3.7.3 Basic principles of process control  
 The meaning of sequence (discontinuous) control 
  typical applicatons 
  the function of a programmable logic controller ( PLC) 
 The meaning of process (continuous) control.   
 The nature and purpose of 
  an electronic controller a transducer 
  a control element 
 The principles of a closed loop control system 
33 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 Definitions, characteristics and applications of t he following types of control: 
  on – off   differential gap 
  time proportioned  proportional, integral and der ivative (PID) 
 The basic characteristics required of a flow contr ol valve in these situations 
 
3.7.4  Computer control  
 The basic requirements of a computer and PLC contr ol system 
The basic principles, respective merits and distillery applications for commonly 
used computer control systems 
  a micro computer control system 
  a mini computer control system  a distributed con trol system 
 
Unit 3.8  Packaging Processes 
3.8.1 Organisation of blending  
The purpose of blending, and the need to meet any legislative requirements for 
product type.  
Consistency of blend 
 Significance of stated age of blend 
 Management of stocks for correct age at blending 
  
3.8.2 Prevention of haze  
 Distinction between haze and floc 
 Relevance of the heads/foreshots cut 
 Removal of haze by precipitation of fatty acid est ers and chill-filtration 
 Prevention of floc by use of de-mineralised water and chill-filtration 
 
3.8.3 Refrigeration  
 Reasons for chilling spirit prior to filtration; a dvantages and disadvantages 
 Basic principles of the closed circuit vapour-comp ression refrigeration cycle 
 
3.8.4    Filtration  
 The principles of design and operation, relative m erits and typical performance of : 
  a plate and frame filter  a leaf filter 
  a candle filter 
 Range of suitable filter media 
 Filter performance as a function of 
  time, temperature, pressure  filter medium     
  dosing rate of filter aid    
particle size and concentration in spirit 
 
3.8.5 Packaging  
 Primary packaging materials 
  basic properties of glass and PET      principles  of manufacture 
  typical faults             marketing impact 
  environmental implications 
34 
Dipl. Distil. Syllabus  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. Syllabus Version 1, November 2009)  
 The basic principles of design and operation of eq uipment for  
  bottle rinsing    bottle filling 
  fill level control   labelling  
 
Secondary packaging materials 
  basic properties 
  influence on operation of packaging line and prod uct image 
 
3.8.6    Packaging Line Design  
 A basic understanding of packaging line design the ory 
  “V” graph    queuing theory and line balance 
  accumulation    use of variable speed equipment 
  handling of materials   handling of rejects and w aste 
 A basic understanding of systems to measure packag ing line performance  
  plant efficiency 
  planned down-time including cleaning, maintenance  and change-over of  
   bottle size or product 
  unplanned down-time including non-availability of  product, materials or  
   services 
  mechanical down-time. 
 
Unit 3.9  Health & Safety 
3.9.1 Fire and explosion risks of ethanol  
 Flash points of aqueous alcohol solutions 
 Flammable and explosive concentrations of alcohol vapour 
 Fire and explosion risks of alcohol, and their pre vention, 
  in batch and continuous distillation  in storage and maturation 
  in blending and packaging   in leakage or spillage 
   
 
3.9.2  Carbon dioxide  
Physiological effects of CO 2           
Dangers of working in fermentation vessels and surrounding areas 
Safety precautions   
 
 
 
 
END OF MODULE 3  
 
END OF SYLLABUS  
 
 
 
 