1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.2. Cereals & Enzymes for Grain 
Whisky & GNS  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 1A: Raw Materials & Preparation 
of Cereal Wort 
 
Unit 1A.2. Cereals and Enzymes Used in Processing C ereals for 
Grain Whisky and Grain Neutral Spirit (GNS) 
 
1A.2.1 General Specifications 
 
The cereals used as raw materials for spirit manufa cture described here include: 
maize, wheat, rye and barley. The enzymes used in p rocessing these cereals to a 
fermentable extract are also included. These may be from kilned malt or from undried 
(green) malt or they be enzymes from various microb ial sources. This list is not 
meant to be exclusive; other cereals such as rice a nd sorghum may be used but 
since this section is focussed on grain whiskey and  GNS it does not include other 
starch sources such as potatoes.  
 
All cereals selected for distilling must be: 
 
•  uncontaminated by weed seeds and any other harvest  debris and free from any 
plant infections such as mould or fungus , 
•  undamaged (i.e. contain no broken corns) 
•  have the correct dry matter content (neither too m uch nor too little water) and 
•  have  a high starch content. 
 
 
1A.2.2 Maize 
 
Maize or corn, Zea  mays , is grown in many parts of the world in warm and t emperate 
climates. It is a cost effective source of carbohyd rate for distillers containing 
approximately 72% starch dwb (on a dry weight basis ). Prior to the UK becoming a 
member of the European Union and, as a consequence,  having to comply with 
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) tariffs on importe d grain, maize was the preferred 
cereal in the Scotch Whisky industry. This policy w as certainly cost driven and the 
cheapest grade 3 North American corn was the norm. The imposition of high import 
tariffs made maize uneconomic despite its high star ch content and relative ease of 
processing. Corn is still the preferred cereal for whiskey distilling in North America 
and here the highest grades (Grades 1 & 2) are used .  Some Scottish grain distillers 
still prefer yellow dent maize imported from France.  
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.2. Cereals & Enzymes for Grain 
Whisky & GNS  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
The maize kernel consists of a germ (11% dry weight  basis), an endosperm (83%), a 
surrounding pericarp (5%) and the tip cap (1%) whic h attached the whole kernel to 
the maize cob. The grain is huskless making the dri ed grain very susceptible to 
breakage especially if it is fast dried to around 1 4%. (the cob can be up to 30% 
moisture when harvested). Overdried grain must ther efore be avoided to obviate 
handling losses. The endosperm is therefore much la rger than in other cereals and 
contains 98% of the total starch and 74% of the tot al protein which is usually around 
10% dwb. The starch granules in the endosperm cells  are therefore more densely 
packed with only a limited surround of protein matr ix. The centre of the endosperm 
usually has a soft mealy appearance as a consequenc e. The cellulosic cell walls are 
also thinner with low pentosan content. The maize k ernel is therefore easily milled to 
expose the starch granules but since they have a mu ch higher gelatinisation 
temperature than other cereals, milled maize has to  be cooked under high pressure 
before enzymic conversion. So whole maize of the hi ghest available quality is best 
for distilling because it gives fewer difficulties in processing, has a low protein and 
high starch content. Such maize can be used to prod uce about 400 litres of pure 
alcohol per tonne of grain used (lpa/t). 
 
A basic specification for distilling maize is a moi sture of about 15% and large, full 
kernels (to give easier processing) with a protein content of about 10%. The fact that 
maize has no husk and has very little endosperm res idue (pentosan and residual 
protein) after conversion also means that spent gra ins are easily dried and pelletised 
for animal feed. 
 
 
1A.2.3 Wheat 
 
Soft winter wheat ( Botanical names  Tritium  vulgare  or Tritium  aestivum ) is a cereal 
grown in warm and temperate climates. It can produc e good yields of grain in a 
colder climate than maize. Soft winter wheat contains about 69% dwb starch so it is a 
good alternative carbohydrate source to maize. Whea t has become the preferred 
cereal for Scottish distillers since it can be locally sourced at competitive prices. 
The composition of wheat grain is: 
 
•  Embryo (3%dwb) 
•  Endosperm (83%dwb) 
•  Pericarp/testa (14%dwb) 
 
The endosperm contains  all the starch (69-70%) and  most of the protein which is 
usually around 12% of the grain weight. 
  
Soft wheat varieties have higher starch content tha n the hard wheat varieties ( Tritium 
durum ) which also have high gluten contents. Consequentl y soft wheats of low 
protein produce higher spirit yields per tonne of g rain used. Wheats in general give 
yields of 350-400 lpa/t. Hard wheats have a much de nser endosperm and higher 
gluten content which makes it more difficult to acc ess the starch granules. The 
protein appears to adhere to the starch more strong ly and even after cooking the 
denatured protein hinders enzymic hydrolysis. 
 
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.2. Cereals & Enzymes for Grain 
Whisky & GNS  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
A basic specification for wheat for distilling is: 
•  moisture, about 15%, 
•  total nitrogen less than 2% (for  high starch cont ent) 
•  specific weight greater than 72kg/hl (also indicat ing high starch 
content). 
 
The fact that even soft wheats have relatively high  protein content and the 
endosperm cell walls have a higher proportion of pe ntosan (75%) than maize (25%) 
makes the processing of wheat spent grains much more difficult. 
 
 
1A.2.4 Rye 
 
Rye ( Secale  montanum ) is a cereal that produces a good yield of grain i n climates 
that experience short hot summers. 
Its starch content lies between that of barley and wheat, usually about 68% dwb.  
Its main use by distillers is to impart a distinct spicy flavour to the spirit. Rye is used 
in the production of some US whiskies; the Rye, Bourbon and Tennessee types.  
 
The distillers purchase specification is similar to that of wheat. 
 
 
1A.2.5 Barley 
 
Unmalted barley is seldom if ever used as the princ ipal cereal in grain distilling. 
Although it should be the cheapest source of starch ( at 65% dwb), the processing 
difficulties caused by the gummy endosperm makes th is an impossibility when used 
on its own. However it can be used in small amounts  as an admixture with wheat in 
the distilling of Irish whiskey.  
The main use of barley in grain distilling is to pr oduce high diastatic malt to convert 
the starch from wheat or maize. This is a necessity  for Scotch whisky distillers who 
cannot use any other source of enzymes. 
The essential requirements in malting diastatic malt are: 
 
•  Selection of a suitable variety with high enzyme p otential 
•  Nitrogen levels of 1.8 – 2.0% which generally yiel d high DP 
•  High out of steep moistures (48 – 50%) 
•  Long cool germination (5-6 days at 14-16 0C) 
•  Low temperature kilning (50- 60 0C) or no kilning (green malt – see below) 
 
These specifications should create a malt with a DP of 180 – 200 units and a DU >50 
units. 
 
Some grain distillers choose to use green malt (fre shly produced malt that has not 
been stabilised by kilning), for its high enzyme co ntent. (N.B. there is also a theory 
that green malt makes a significant contribution to  grain nms (new make spirit) 
flavour). Green malt must be used very soon after i t is produced because it continues 
to metabolise, generating heat and stimulating undesirable microbial growth so it  
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.2. Cereals & Enzymes for Grain 
Whisky & GNS  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
must be kept as cool as possible. This requires ver y precise “just-in-time” logistics 
and a malt supply which is either on site or very c lose to the distillery. The high 
transport costs of a product that is still 45% mois ture on delivery, cannot be stored if 
there is a production hold up and contains about 4%  of non-extractable rootlets 
makes the economics of this exercise questionable e ven if the malt has a 30-50% 
higher equivalent DP to kilned malt. This disparity  can be reduced by lightly kilning 
malt to 6% moisture and by not exposing it  to high  finishing temperatures. For 
example malt dried with an initial air-on temperatu re of 50 0C will have a longer free 
drying stage when the malt bed will be around 20 0C and the DU levels may actually 
increase because of the mild stewing effect. This m alt can be finished post break at 
60 0C and high air flows. 
In distilleries using green malt, the milling is done in a wet hammer mill. The objective 
of the milling is to expose the enzymes needed to e ffect conversion. Milled green 
malt has the consistency of a thin porridge, no par ticles being greater than a quarter 
of a corn in size.  
 
1A.2.6 Enzymes for GNS Production and Non-Scotch Whisky 
 
It is possible to break starch down completely to g lucose using microbial enzymes. 
These starch-degrading enzymes are products of selected bacteria and fungi and are 
produced and sold by specialist enzyme companies. T he enzymes are partially 
purified and sold to the food, drinks and detergent  industries. There are usually at 
least two or three different enzymes in the mix. Th e individual enzymes will either 
have different actions on the starch or have differ ent temperature or pH preferences. 
This allows them to cope with varied mashing conditions. 
 
The main enzyme used in all starch saccharification  enzyme mixes is 
amyloglucosidase (sometimes called glucoamylase). T his can break all links in the 
starch molecule given sufficient time. It releases glucose as the sole fermentable 
sugar. 
 
In enzyme preparations sold to distillers, there ar e usually two other enzymes that 
speed up the overall action: 
 
•  Alpha-amylase is included to reduce the viscosity,  speeding up the whole 
process and 
•  enzymes that specifically break down branched chai ns in dextrins (called by 
various names: ‘debranching’ enzymes, ‘pullulanase’ , ‘limit dextrinase’) also 
speeds the process  and increase the fermentability of the extract 
 
The enzymes preparations sometimes contain enzymes that break down proteins 
(proteinases) and glucans (glucanases). These could  have a significant effect in 
exposing the starch to attack by the saccharificati on enzymes. The result could be to 
speed the completion of the conversion of starch to sugar. 
 
Again, it is the combined effect that gives a good result, in this case the rapid and 
complete breakdown of starch to glucose. 
 
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.2. Cereals & Enzymes for Grain 
Whisky & GNS  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
The companies that supply enzymes will work with th e distiller to find the best mix of 
enzymes to use and to offer advice on best way to u se the mix. This often has to be 
found by trial and error.  
 
The commonest sources of alpha –amylase are the bac teria  Bacillus subtilis  and 
Bacillus licheniformis  and the fungus  Aspergillus oryzae . Since the enzyme is 
produced extracellularly production of commercial quantities can be a simple filtration 
or centrifugation of the culture medium and concent ration of the mother liquor. Such 
preparations are therefore not purely alpha-amylase  in content but they may contain 
other enzymes such as beta-glucanase or protease as  well The ancillary enzymes 
may actually enhance the performance of the main co mponent by releasing 
additional starch from the grain so are tolerated. The production of pure enzyme with 
a single specificity is relatively expensive so ind ustrial enzymes are usually sold as a 
“soup”  with alpha-amylase, amyloglucosidase or pul lulanase as the main activity. 
 
Amyloglucosidase is also produced and sold on this basi from cultures of  the fungi 
Aspergillus niger and some species of   Rhizopus. Similarly pullulanase is sourced 
from cultures of Klebsiella aerogenes ( Aerobacter aerogenes  in previous taxonomy) 
 
The specificity and action of these enzymes in grai n distilling is described in detail in 
Unit 1A.5 on cooked cereal processing . 
 