1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
        Unit 2.5  Batch Distillation 
There are significant variations between stills of brandy, rum and whisky 
distilleries, and even within each of these industries there are many different still 
designs.  However, this unit is concerned with the principles of pot still operation, 
which are essentially the same for all of these products.  The few instances 
where the information is not applicable to all three spirits, but it is sufficiently 
important for all candidates to know, are mentioned as necessary.  The 
examination questions also have to be based on basic principles, not on the 
features of a specific type of still, although these may be relevant to some 
answers.   
 
General aspects of distillation 
The separation of a mixture of liquids by distillation depends on differences in 
volatility.  Ethanol, boiling point 78 oC, is more volatile than water, BP 100 oC.  
Figure 2.5.1 shows the theoretical behaviour at atmospheric pressure of 
ethanol-water mixtures over the full range of alcohol concentrations.  Some 
deviation will be observed in practice, according to the design of the still and 
opportunity for reflux, as explained later. Using 10% alcohol by volume as an 
example, the mixture remains in the liquid phase during heating up to 93 oC.  At 
that temperature the vertical 10% abv line meets the “bubble point” graph, i.e. 
when evaporation.of the mixture begins.  Since ethanol is more volatile than 
water, the vapour phase is richer in ethanol than the liquid phase from which it 
evaporated.  Following the horizontal 93 oC line to the right, it meets the “dew 
point” graph, i.e. condensation, at a point corresponding to 55% abv.  Since the 
alcohol concentration in the condensate is the same as in the vapour, the product 
of distillation of 10% alcohol in water is spirit of 55% abv.  However, as alcohol 
distilled off, the solution becomes weaker, so the alcohol concentration in the 
distillate falls and the boiling point rises.  Distillation is normally stopped when the 
vapour and distillate fall to 1% abv, corresponding to 0.1% abv remaining in the 
still (but the scale of the graph below is too small for the 1.0 and 0.1% 
relationship to be obvious).  The main reason is the cost of the energy.  
Distillation of such dilute alcohol costs more than the value of the product. 
   
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
                    
  
 
Figure 2.5.1.  Distillation temperature vs composition of ethanol-water mixtures 
So a single stage of distillation, even from a relatively high start point of 10%, 
gives a poor yield of distilled spirit of the required strength.  At least two 
successive distillations are required.  If all the distillate from the first stage, i.e. 
from 55% down to 0.1% abv, is combined, its final strength is usually about 20%, 
the exact value depending on the shape of the still and rate of distillation.  Figure 
2.5.1 uses 25% as an example of the second distillation, showing first distillate 
about 73% abv.  If spirit is collected down to 55% (but could stop anywhere 
between 65% and 50%), that complete batch will be about 65% abv, a suitable 
strength for maturation.  The remaining alcohol is too valuable to waste, so is 
collected down to 1% as tails or feints, which are added to the next charge of the 
still for re-distillation.  The first still is known as the beer still, wine still, wash still 
or various other local names; the second is usually known as the spirit still. 
 
Design and operation of pot stills 
It is impossible to discuss here all of the possible designs of still.  Figure 2.5.2 
shows a typical beer/wash still for rum or whisky, and its capacity would probably 
be in the range 2000 – 15000 litres.  Most brandy s tills are at the bottom end of 
that range, and have a much shorter neck, but the principle of operation is the 
same.     
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
     
  
Figure 2.5.2.  Typical pot still for beer/wash distillation.  1, Pot.  2, Neck*  3, Lyne 
arm* or Lye pipe  [* or 2 and 3 may be collectively known as a Swan neck]  4. 
Shell-and-tube condenser.  5, Vapour chamber of condenser.  6, Tail pipe with 
by-pass valve.  7. Steam coil.  Steam entry and its control valve are shown, but 
not the condensate return to the boiler, via a thermostatic stream trap.  8, Fill 
level.  9, Charging line and valve.             10, Discharge line (with sight glass), 
11, Valve to release air during filling.  12, Safety valve (anti-collapse valve) to 
release vacuum during discharge.  Not shown is a man-door giving access for 
cleaning and maintenance, fitted just above normal fill level.   
The sight glass in the neck is required in rum and whisky distilleries to control 
frothing of fermented beer or wash with its content of CO 2 and surface-active 
components of yeast and raw materials.  That is unnecessary in the spirit still 
since its charge does not froth (nor does the clear wine used for most brandy 
stills).  All but the very smallest stills require pressure and vacuum valves for 
protection during operation, or emptying.   
 
Since this account of distillation has to be applicable to brandy, rum and 
whisk(e)y, this is an appropriate point to clarify the nomenclature (Table 2.5.1).  
Although these are the commonly used names, some distilleries may have their 
own jargon.  In this description, the terms Beer and Low Wines will normally be 
used for the charges to the first and second stills respectively, Heads, Sprit and 
Tails for the fractions from the spirit still, and Pot ale and Spent lees the non-
volatile residues of the Beer and Sprit stills respectively.   The Scottish spelling 
Whisky will be used for whiskies in general, in order that “Whiskey” can 
specifically mean that product when necessary. 
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
 
Table 2.5.1.  Nomenclature in different types of distillery.. 
 
Spirit        Feedstock to       Name of      Produ cts of         Fractions (cuts)  
          first stage         first stage      firs t stage            of spirit still 
         distillation still                  still        distillation   
Brandy  Wine          Wine still       Brouillis          Heads, Spirit, Tails* 
              (Residues                 Vinasse    Vinasse ) 
  
Rum  Beer           Beer still     Low wines         Heads, Spirit, Tails 
             (Residues      Slop/Stillage   Stillag e )   
Whisky Wash           Wash still     Low wines      Foreshots, Spirit,  Feints 
             (R esidues                  Pot ale    Spent lees )   
(Whiskey) Beer           Beer still         Heads, Spirit, Tails  
*Some brandy distilleries take two spirit fractions. 
 
Heating system.   The still of Figure 2.5.2 is fitted with a sufficient length of coiled 
copper tube to provide the necessary heating surface.  An alternative 
arrangement is a single circle of pipe, fitted with vertical hollow plates (pans) with 
constitute most of the heat transfer area.  The domed base of the still is a relic of 
the original system of direct firing.  That continues in use in a few distilleries, but 
perhaps now by gas or oil rather than the original solid fuel.  Since that gives a 
higher temperature of the copper surface than on a steam coil, there is a 
significant difference in flavour.  Also, the baking effect of the higher temperature 
creates a harder deposit.which may be impossible to remove by caustic 
detergents alone (acid products must not  be used on copper!).  In Scotland the 
traditional cleaning system for direct-fired stills is a “rummager”, a large rotating 
brush of copper chains which scrape the deposit from the base of the still.   
 
There must be sufficient charge that the liquid remaining at the end of distillation 
covers the heating coils, but the still would normally be filled to the maximum 
capacity shown in Figure 2.5.2.  It is common practice to pre-heat the charge to 
the beer still as an energy-saving measure, through a heat exchanger against the 
flow of hot (~ 100 oC) pot ale from the previous run.  The charge enters the still at 
50 – 60 oC, too low for loss of alcohol (Figure 2.5.1).  Heating must begin 
immediately, before solids settle on the heat transfer area (steam coil, or base of 
the still in the case of direct firing).  Once heating begins they are kept in 
suspension by the vigorous convection currents. Although rapid heating to boiling 
point saves time, the risk of ethyl carbamate formation in malt whisky wash is 
reduced by slower heating.  It must be possible to reduce the heat immediately 
and rapidly when froth is seen in the sight glass (or lower glass, if the neck is 
fitted with two).  If the still is fitted with a temperature gauge, that provides 
advance warning.  Another warning sign of the start of distillation, if the discharge 
pipe in the spirit safe it fitted with a flap valve, is fluttering of the flap.  Beer in the 
liquid phase must not pass over into the receiver vessel.  That includes the 
droplets from bursting foam bubbles which could be carried over with the flow of 
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
vapour (entrainment).  The distillate must be volatiles only ; entrained liquid has 
not been distilled and therefore includes unacceptable non-volatile congeners.  
That constitutes a “foul distillation” which must be re-distilled.  In Scotland, re-
distillation requires special Excise arrangements and installing temporary 
pipework back to the wash still.  
 
Usually the vigorous frothing is over within 30 min, as CO 2 is driven off and any 
surface-active components of the beer or yeast cells are inactivated.  Then 
heating can be cautiously increased to hold the remaining froth just visible in the 
sight glass, or at the level of the lower glass if there are two.  Since the boiling 
temperature rises throughout distillation as the alcohol concentration falls, a 
gradual increase of heating is necessary to maintain a constant flow rate of 
distillate at the spirit safe.  Although the charge to the spirit still does not froth, it 
is essential to maintain a precise distillation rate for consistent amounts of flavour 
congeners in successive distillations.  The rate of distillation is less important for 
tails.   
 
Condensers.    
Module 3 covers their construction and operation, but the effect of the principal 
types of condenser on spirit flavour is relevant here.  All three types are normally 
constructed of copper.  The beneficial effect on flavour, especially removal of 
sulphur congeners, is worth the cost of corrosion and more frequent repairs than 
would be necessary with stainless steel.  The still in Figure 2.5.2 has a shell-and-
tube condenser, a copper shell encasing a bundle of copper tubes.  The number 
and length of tubes (i.e. the surface area for condensation and then cooling to 
20 oC) is calculated to match the capacity and distillation rate of the still.  Many 
distilleries still have the older “worm” condenser, a spiral of copper pipe built up 
of flanged sections bolted together, gradually decreasing in diameter as shown in 
Figure 2.5.3.  To provide the required cooling area, the total length immersed in 
the tank (tub) of cooling water could be 100 m.  The third possible type of 
condenser, a plate heat exchanger, is used in only a few distilleries.     
 
Distillation of flavour congeners 
Figure 2.5.1 refers to a mixture of ethanol and water.  However, the charge to the 
wine still of a brandy distillery is a mixture of ethanol and water with the 
numerous flavour congeners from both the grapes and yeast metabolism.  In rum 
and whisky distilleries the congeners also include structural components of the 
yeast, since it is normal practice not  to remove yeast before distillation.  These 
components vary in volatility, but basically form three groups: (A) more volatile 
than ethanol, (B) averaging approximately the same  
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
                
      
Figure 2.5.3.  Worm condenser. 
 
          
  
Figure 2.5.4.  Volatility of typical flavour congeners. 
 
volatility as ethanol and (C) less volatile.  Phenol itself, shown as the example of 
type C in Figure 2.5.4, is relevant only to peated malt whiskies, but grapes and 
malt have various  
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
minor components which are phenolic in nature and of similar low volatility, as 
are long-chain fatty acids such as oleic, linoleic and palmitic, from yeast 
membranes.  To be strictly accurate, type (B) compounds are more volatile than 
ethanol at low ethanol concentrations, but become less volatile as ethanol 
concentration increases (Figure 2.5.4).  This is particularly important in the spirit 
still, since distillate for maturation is collected for only part of the run.   
 
In the second-stage distillation in the spirit still, the first distillate contains high-
volatile congeners of unacceptable flavour, e.g. sulphur compounds and 
acetaldehyde.  Methanol is another possible unwelcome high-volatile congener 
to be removed.  The first distillate also contains unacceptable low -volatile 
congeners, which condensed and formed a residue on the inner surfaces of the 
still towards the end of the previous run.  These compounds, mainly long-chain 
fatty acids and their esters, are re-dissolved by the strong alcohol at the start of 
distillation, but if allowed to remain in the spirit would come out of solution again 
on dilution to bottling strength, forming a haze.  So the heads fraction is removed 
for re-distillation before collecting the middle cut, the spirit fraction.  The cut point 
between heads and sprit may be decided simply by time, from experience of how 
long is required.  A more precise determination involves diluting a small sample 
of the distillate with its own volume of water: cloudiness indicates that these fatty 
congeners are still being dissolved into the distillate.  Yet another possibility is by 
sensory assessment: has distillation ceased of undesirable high-volatile 
congeners, e.g. S compounds? 
    
  
Figure 2.5.5.  Profile of congeners during spirit distillation.  A, more volatile than 
ethanol; B, similar volatility to ethanol, C, less volatile than ethanol., and C2 is 
less volatile than C1. 
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
 
Figure 2.5.5 shows the amounts of the three types of congener distilled over the 
duration  of a run.  Two different type C congeners are shown to give a more 
complete picture of the situation.  The graph of type B is similar to ethanol itself.  
Type C compounds distil      slowly at first, then in increasing amount as alcohol 
concentration falls (and equally important, distillation temperature rises).  The 
difference between cut points 60% and 50% abv is that a greater amount of the 
type B and C congeners is collected with the 50% cut point, particularly C since 
they are distilling in increasing amount as alcohol concentration falls.  
Incidentally, although 50% abv is well below the usual strength for maturation, 
that is the cut point, not the strength of the bulk spiirit  The alcohol concentration 
in the distillate is falling so quickly between 60% and 50% abv that only a 
relatively small amount of weak spirit is collected over that time, and an average 
of at least 65% abv can be expected.  Then the tails fraction is collected down to 
1% abv, and the heads and tails are combined with low wines from the beer still 
for the next run. 
 
For rum and whisky, only the spirit distillation is cut in this way; the low wines 
from the first distillation are collected as a single fraction.  This is not  true of 
brandy distillation (fruit brandies in general, not just grape).  An important 
component of these fruits is pectin, the methyl ester of polygalacturonic acid, and 
some degradation to methanol is unavoidable, even though the fruit debris is 
removed early in the fermentation.  Since methanol is more volatile than ethanol 
it is collected as a heads fraction which is normally discarded.  Although it is 
possible to re-distil and separate that methanol-ethanol mixture, that is 
impracticable for the majority of small-scale brandy distillers. 
 
Measurement of alcohol strength is commonly by hydrometer, but in most 
countries electronic measurement is an acceptable alternative.  Thermometers 
are also required, since the alcohol strength or specific gravity must be measured 
at 20 oC, or corrected to that temperature by reference to tables.  In many 
countries the measurement is done in a sealed glass cabinet (spirit safe), with 
the distillate from the still discharging into a bowl in which the hydrometer floats.  
The spirit safe may be legally required by the excise 
authority to prevent unauthorised removal of spirit, but it also has the practical 
advantage of giving accurate control of cut points.   For a rum or whisky distillery, 
the section of the safe for monitoring the beer still requires only one bowl, and a 
hydrometer calibrated for greatest accuracy at 1% alcohol (or the corresponding 
density, from which % abv is determined by tables).  The part of the safe 
receiving the distillate from the spirit still requires two bowls with different 
hydrometers in each (one for 1% abv, the other for 60% or whatever is the spirit 
to tails cut point), and a swiveling spout to run the distillate to the spirit receiver or 
the heads and tails receiver as required.  A water tap and a facility for sampling 
are also required if the heads-spirit cut point is decided by the “misting” test.   
 
9 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Although the process is called batch distillation, in reality the spirit distillation is 
only partly so.  Depending on cut points, 35 – 40% of the distillate from the spirit 
still is recycled.  However, a stable level of congeners is maintained by losses 
from each cycle of the stills.  Type B compounds distil with ethanol.  Apart from 
the small amount distilled into the spirit, type C congeners are either discharged 
with the spent stillage (pot ale and spent lees), or if distilled into the tails, remain 
in the charger vessels, either coating the walls or forming s a separate layer of 
denser liquid.  Also, a proportion of the high-volatile type A congeners is lost to 
atmosphere from each distillation.  So the amount of A, B and C congeners in 
each successive batch of spirit is approximately constant.  To summarise, a 
typical batch distillation process is illustrated in Figure 2.5.6, showing the 
volumes at each stage per 1000 litres of original beer/wash.  
 
                         
  
Figure 2.5.6.  Relative quantities in double distillation per 1000 litres of wash.  
Although for convenience both stills are drawn the same size, in reality, with a 
charge of only 60% that of the beer/wash still, the spirit still is usually 
correspondingly smaller.  
 
Balanced or unbalanced distillation .  It is common practice to collect the low 
wines, heads and tails in a single receiver vessel, since they have to be mixed 
anyway for the next distillation.  For the discussion so far of the process it has 
been assumed that the two stills are started simultaneously and operated over 
approximately the same time. This is a common procedure, although the 
distillation time could vary from 4 to 10 hours in different distilleries.  Alternatively, 
the beer still could be run over half the time of the spirit run where slow distillation 
is considered to contribute to the characteristic flavour of a particular distillery's 
product.  So, for example, two 5-h runs of the beer still could provide low wines 
for a 10-h run of the spirit still.  Only one batch of heads and tails would be 
available for recycle, but with two volumes of low wines the total charge would 
require a spirit still approximately the same size as the beer still (e.g., according 
to Figure 2.5.6, the spirit still charge would be 350 + 350 + 250 = 950 litres).  
Both of these schedules are examples of “balanced distillation”, giving each 
successive run of the spirit still a charge of the same volume and composition, 
10 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
and usually in the range 20 – 25% abv.  Higher or l ower strengths may be 
encountered in distilleries operating with unusually high or low abv values of cut 
points. The volume and alcoholic strength of low wines, spirit, heads and tails are 
remarkably constant for a specific still system operated in a consistent way, 
although there is wide variation between distilleries.     
 
The alternative of unbalanced distillation has the advantage that the first still to 
complete its run can be started again without waiting for its partner to finish, 
maximising the use of expensive plant.  Against that economic logic is the 
problem that the charge for each run of the spirit still could have different 
composition, according to what was available at the time of filling, so each 
distillation produces a slightly differently flavoured spirit.  The problem is not so 
serious in larger distilleries with several pairs of stills, each at different stages of 
the distillation cycle.  However, even in a basic 2-still layout, separate receiver 
vessels for (a) low wines and (b) the combined heads and tails from the spirit still, 
may allow preparation of more consistent charges with respect to both congener 
composition and alcoholic strength.  In any case, combining spirit from a number 
of distillations for cask filling helps to even out variations between individual 
distillations. 
  
Number of stills .  The great majority of distilleries use either one pair of stills as 
described above, or multiple pairs.  Some small-scale distillers operate with a 
single still, which first produces several batches of low wines and then is used for 
a spirit distillation, but otherwise follows standard procedures.  Triple distillation is 
also sufficiently common to require description of a typical programme here: 
(a)  First stage: the beer/wash still operates in the same way as for double 
distillation, and its low wines pass to the intermediate still (IS).   
(b)  Second stage, the IS distils only two fractions, since there is no need to 
recycle first runnings here: The first fraction, called heads or high wines, 
proceeds to the next run of the spirit still and the tails are returned to the next IS 
distillation.  The IS heads-tails cut point can be a much lower % abv than would 
be possible for a spirit fraction intended for maturation, even down to 20%, but 
even so, the charge to the spirit still is much stronger than in double distillation, 
typically > 50% abv..  
(c) Third stage: the spirit still, charged with the heads from the IS and its own 
heads and tails recycle, is operated in the normal way except that the higher % 
abv of the charge means that it produces a stronger final spirit, > 80% abv.   
 
Therefore the final matured product from triple distillation is “lighter” in flavour, for 
three reasons: (a) the greater rectification of three rather than two distillations, (b) 
three opportunities rather than two for the copper still surfaces to remove sulphur 
congeners, and (c) the stronger spirit requires greater dilution for maturation, and 
ultimately bottling, which further dilutes congener flavour in the final product.  In a 
few Scotch whisky distilleries, a programme similar to triple distillation is operated 
with pairs of stills, using a spirit still as an IS as required. 
 
11 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Pre-distillation influences on quality  
Yeast metabolism and microbial infection influence all three of brandy, rum and 
whisky.  
The importance of consistent fermentation procedure is discussed in unit 2.3 and 
the benign or malign effect of bacteria and wild yeasts in unit 2.4.  However, raw 
materials also have important effects on quality and flavour, which can be very 
different in brandy, rum and whisky distilling.  One specific type of each is 
discussed below as an example. 
 
Cognac brandy : The specified grape varieties are low in sugar and high in 
acidity, giving a sour wine of only about 8% abv which is more suitable for 
distillation than stronger table wine, concentrating the fruity flavours of the grapes 
along with the alcohol.  Additionally, the temperature of distillation encourages 
copper-catalysed non-enzymic esterification of alcohols with the acids from the 
grapes.  Also, the common practice of a natural inoculum of yeasts contributes a 
desirable complexity of fermentation flavour. 
 
Caribbean dark rums :  In many distilleries, inoculation of the fermentation is 
either entirely by a naturally occurring inoculum of yeasts and various bacteria, or 
by cultured distillery yeast supplemented by natural inoculum.  Although the spirit 
retains character-istics of cane juice or molasses, the congeners from the mixed-
culture fermentation have more impact on aroma.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Scotch malt whisky .  Much of the flavour of malt develops during drying (kilning) 
after germination, but dimethyl sulphide formed from S-methyl methionine is an 
unwelcome congener from kilned malt.  More seriously, the carcinogen 
nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) is a possible product of faulty kilning which could 
theoretically be distilled with the spirit, but must be prevented for health reasons 
(see unit 2.8, Quality).  Although there is no need for the malt to impart colour to 
the wort, some development of colour is unavoidable during kilning.  More 
importantly, all of the following malt components or derivatives make an 
acceptable contribution to whisky flavour: aliphatic acids and aldehydes, and 
Strecker degradation products (amino acids => aldehydes) and Maillard 
(browning) reactions from kilning. Also the volatile heterocyclics derived from -
amino ketones of these kilning reactions may be important.  For some malt 
whiskies, the malt is exposed to smoke from smouldering peat during the kilning.  
Peat has a high content of the phenolic polymer lignin (unit 2.7, Maturation, 
includes an explanation of lignin structure).  So peat smoke adds various 
phenolic compounds (phenol itself, ortho-, meta- and  para-cresols, guaiacol, etc) 
which add their flavour to the spirit.  
 
Reflux 
Condensed vapour in the neck of the still runs back into the pot as reflux. 
Compounds of lowest volatility reflux most actively.  For example, the theoretical 
alcohol concentrations from distillation of the ethanol-water mixture in Figure 
2.5.1 are lower than one’s practical experience in the distillery because they do 
12 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
not take into account the effect of reflux.  The preferential reflux of low-volatile 
water creates a stronger alcohol vapour to pass to the condenser, than indicated 
on the graph.   
 
Factors affecting reflux are (a) the shape of the still, (b) additional refluxing 
equipment, (c) the rate of distillation, (d) the fill level of the still, (e) the ambient 
temperature and (f) the cleanliness of the outer surface of the still.  The first three 
are the most important.  Consider stills A and B of Figure 2.5.7.  Clearly, the neck 
of A has greater surface area,  
and therefore more reflux, and condensation in the upward-sloping lyne arm also 
refluxes 
back into the still.  In B, reflux in the arm runs forward into the condenser as 
spirit.  
                                          
  
 
Figure 2.5.7.  Effect of still geometry on reflux.  Note the greater condensation 
area, and therefore greater reflux, of A. 
 
It is possible to increase reflux even more, e.g. by perforated plates (sieve plates) 
in the neck of the still.  Even the increased reflux with 1 or 2 plates has a 
significant effect on congener profile, but with 10 – 20 (Figure 2.5.8A) it becomes 
essentially a small column still operating batchwise.  Figure 2.5.8A is no 
particular type of still, but is intended to show the principle used in some brandy 
and rum distilleries, and also in some gin distilleries for re-distillation of the heads 
and tails fractions (unit 2.7).  
13 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
 
 
Figure 2.5.8.  Increased reflux in pot stills: A. by sieve plates in the neck; B, by a 
“purifier” in the lyne arm.   
 
Figure 2.5.8A suggests that the high-volatile heads are released to atmosphere, 
but a heat exchanger is normally fitted at the top to recover part of the heads, 
especially any ethanol it may contain, for reflux.  Stills for Armagnac brandy have 
a similar appearance, but since they actually do operate in continuous mode, 
continuous overflow from the pot of low-volatile tails (as well as the vinasse/spent 
lees) is also necessary to maintain a constant volume, and concentration of 
alcohol and congeners.   
 
Yet anther possibility for increasing reflux is a small condenser fitted in a 
downward-sloping lyne arm which returns condensate to the still rather than 
allowing it to progress to the spirit receiver vessel.  At first sight, an upward 
sloping arm as in Figure 2.5.7A is a simpler way to achieve that effect.  The 
advantage of a “purifier”, one design of which is shown in Figure 2.5.8B, is that 
the reflux can be altered from one distillation to the next by the flow rate of 
cooling water to produce two or more differently-flavoured spirits from the same 
still.  Such a system can be found in some rum and whisky distilleries.  The 
general effect of greater reflux is a “lighter” spirit, and less reflux increases the 
content of low-volatile congeners in the spirit.  The latter situation is particularly 
important with peated Scotch malt whiskies, to maximize the effect of the low-
volatile phenolic congeners from peat smoke.   A faster rate of distillation reduces 
reflux since the vapour has less chance of condensing in the neck of the still, 
therefore a greater amount of low-volatile congeners can be expected in the 
spirit.  The converse applies to slower distillation, but another benefit is the 
stronger spirit resulting from refluxing more water.   Less reflux also affects 
14 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
flavour in another way: there is less opportunity for the copper surface to react 
with S congeners, further adding to the stronger flavour of the spirit.   
 
The other three factors (d), (e) and (f) above are much less important, but 
nevertheless worth mention.  Lower ambient temperature, a dull external surface 
(more heat loss by convection and radiation) and the additional air-cooled 
surface from a low fill level, all lead to more condensation within the still, i.e. 
more reflux. 
 
Copper surfaces 
There has been frequent incidental mention in these notes of the effect of copper 
on spirit quality.  This section deals specifically with three aspects of reactions 
involving copper: (a) removal of sulphur congeners, (b) catalytic effects.and (c) 
exhaustion and reactivation by resting. 
 
Although the original choice of copper for still construction was its malleability for 
construction of complex shapes, and perhaps also its high conductivity of heat, 
the removal of sulphur compounds by reaction with copper is now the main 
reason for its use.  The beneficial effects of copper on spirit quality are its high 
level of reactivity in reflux and condensate with S congeners, and catalytic effect 
on non-enzymic esterific-ation.  The higher the temperature, the greater the 
reactivity, but also the faster the rate of corrosion.  The reactions with S 
compounds produce both soluble copper salts, e.g. CuSO 4, and insoluble copper 
salts and complexes.  In Scotch malt whisky production, although copper levels 
are < 10 mg/litre in the pot ale from wash distillation, as much as 50 mg/litre is 
possible in the spent lees from spirit distillation.   
 
Since the same reactions also occur in the condenser, it is inevitable that some 
copper is dissolved into the spirit, but with the lower average temperature and 
much shorter contact time the amount is small, well below the safe limit.  Also, 
some of that copper is removed during maturation.  Shell-and-tube and worm 
condensers are known to have different effects on spirit flavour, largely due to 
reactions between Cu and S.  The worm operates at a lower temperature, and 
being a single tube, has a higher flow rate.  Both of these factors reduce 
reactivity in the worm, resulting in higher content of S congeners in the spirit.  
However, provided the amounts are not too high in the g/litre range, many S 
congeners add a desirable note to the aroma, variously described as meaty or 
spicy.                                                                                                                       
   
The section on balanced/unbalanced distillation referred to the immediate re-use 
of stills.  As well as unbalancing the cycles, another disadvantage of such haste 
is the “exhaustion” of the internal surface of the still.  If stills are refilled and 
restarted immediately after each run, the level of S compounds in the spirit rises 
to unacceptable levels over the course of a week’s operation.  At the same time 
the amount of dissolved copper falls, but gradual loss of still structure is 
necessary for good-quality spirit.  Although longer should be allowed if possible, 
15 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.5. Hygiene Batch 
Distillation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
even 1 – 2 hours of lying open to the atmosphere af ter each run allows oxidation 
reactions which “reactivate” the exhausted copper surface to Cu salts which are 
dissolved in the next run of the still.  Except for the heating surfaces, from which 
deposits of yeast and other debris must be removed as necessary, it is generally 
considered that there is no need for cleaning internal surfaces of stills with 
caustic detergents. 
 
Efficiency of distillation 
The 10% abv example in Figure 2.5.1 is rather ambitions for most brandy, rum 
and whisky distilleries.  The following example is based on a charge of 10000 
litres of 8.2% abv, which could reasonably be expected from complete 
fermentation of wort of 15 o B, SG 1060.  The theoretical yield of the two (or three) 
stages of distillation is 10000 x 0.082 = 820 litres.of pure alcohol (LPA), or 1171 
litres of spirit of 70% abv, but this figure does not allow for the 0.1% abv left in 
each still at the end of distillation.  
  
Calculating from the amounts per 1000 litres quoted in Figure 2.5.6, 6500 litres of 
0.1% abv residue remain in the beer/wash still, accounting for a loss of 6.5 LPA; 
and the 2400 litres of stillage from the spirit still a further 2.4 LPA, i.e. 
approximately 9 LPA in total.  However, a distillery should come close to a 
revised theoretical yield of 820 – 9 = 811 LPA from  10000 litres of 8.2% abv.  The 
loss of about 9 litres of un-distilled alcohol from each run of the pair of stills (i.e. 
12.9 litres of 70% spirit, or 22.5 litres at 40% bottling strength) is significant, but 
the energy requirement to recover that volume is not justified. 
 
Further reading 
D. A. Nicol’s chapter Batch Distillation in Whisky, Technology, Production and 
Marketing, ed. I. Russell (Academic Press, 2003) covers general aspects of 
distillation in pot stills. 
 
Also, various chapters in the Proceedings of the Aviemore Conferences and 
Distilled Spirits Conferences of the IBD cover relevant aspects of batch 
distillation. 
 
 
 
 
 