1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1C: Preparation of Grape Must  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 1C: Preparation of Grape Must 
- Summary 
 
1. Sources of Grapes and Wine for Spirit Production 
 
This section deals only with wine made from grapes that is going to be used for 
the distillation of brandy and neutral spirit. 
 
Many different kinds of fruits can be the starting material to make alcohol; the 
pressed-out juice just needs to contain fermentable  sugar. A wide range of fruits 
can, (when ripe), contain between 5 and 12% by weight of sugar.  
For instance, apples, cherries, pears, plums and vi ne grapes are the raw material 
for a wide range of distilled beverages including calvados, slivovitz and kirsch.  
 
By far the most popular of the fruits used is of co urse the fruit of Vitis vinifera , the 
species of vine that produces the most successful w ine grapes. The juice from 
ripe grapes of Vitis vinifera  can contain up to 24% ( w/v) of sugar by weight. Many 
of the grapes are grown for the production of table  wines and brandies have a 
sugar concentration of about 20% ( w/v). 
 
‘Brandy’ is the word used to describe the distillat e of fermented fruit juices. In 
some regions of the world the word ‘brandy’ is also  used to describe drinks made 
from other raw materials, for instance corn brandy in Germany (Kornbranntwein). 
Vitis vinifera  is grown in large quantity in all suitable climates  in the world. Its fruit, 
the grape itself, has been fermented by mankind for  many millennia to produce 
wine. 
 
Grape juice is an almost perfect raw material for fermentation to wine because: 
1. the wine tastes pleasant, 
2. the juice of ripe grapes contains a suitable con centration of sugar for 
fermentation by yeasts, 
3. the juice contains yeast nutrients and, 
4. it also contains acids that reduce the pH to a l evel that prevents 
contamination by bacteria. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1C: Preparation of Grape Must  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
2. Vine Varieties and Cultivation of Grape Vines 
 
2.1. Vine varieties 
In certain regions the vine varieties are chosen sp ecifically for the spirit to be 
distilled. For instance under French law there are three vine varieties that must 
provide not less than 90% of the grapes for cognac:  Ugni blanc, Colombard and 
Folle Blanche. In the armagnac region the same thre e varieties are allowed plus a 
fourth, Baco 22 A. 
 
In other areas grape varieties are selected for dis tilling brandy. The selection has 
two stages: 
•  varieties are selected on the basis of good viticu ltural characteristics, such 
as yield of grapes and resistance to disease, 
•  then the acceptable varieties from the first stage  are used to produce 
brandy and a selection made based on the flavour of the brandy produced. 
 
Sometimes the brandy distiller has little or no cho ice of variety, taking in wine as it 
is available.  
 
For neutral spirit production the variety of vine used to make the wine is irrelevant, 
the alcohol content is all that matters. 
 
2.2. Cultivation of grape vines 
The most important factors for the production of a good yield of suitable grapes 
are: 
•  the selection of the grape vine variety to suit th e location of the vineyard, 
the soil and the type of wine required, 
•  the weather during the growing season and 
•  the time of harvest. 
 
Grape vines are perennial plants, growing with a te ndril system that allows the 
stems to attach themselves to supports such as a tr ellis or wire system. As 
perennials, they prefer to have an active growing s eason and a dormant season 
that together cover the span of one year. Vines can  have a long productive life, 
cropping well after a few years and going on croppi ng for many seasons 
afterwards. Both shoot and flower buds for the next  season’s growth and the 
grape crop are formed during the previous growing season. 
 
After the dormant season (winter) the shoot buds op en, the shoots produce 
leaves and grow rapidly and then the flower buds op en. The fertilised flowers 
produce berries that grow until they become grapes. 
 
Cultivation of the gape vines is called ‘viticultur e’, needing an expert ’viticulturalist’ 
to get the best yields and quality of grapes.  
 
Some of important tasks for the viticulturalist are: 
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1C: Preparation of Grape Must  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
•  training the vines over the supports to allow for easy harvesting of the 
grapes, 
•  pruning the vines to maintain adequate growth and get the desired crop of 
grapes, 
•  carrying out disease and pest control and 
•  irrigating during growing season (if necessary) 
•  protecting young shoots from frost (if necessary).  
 
 
3. The Composition of Must (Grape juice) 
 
It is not possible to give a typical composition of  grape must because it varies so 
much with region, climate, weather, vine variety and vineyard.  
 
The following analysis is an example, all amounts being quoted as% ( w/v): 
 
•  water………………………………………………………       78 
•  fermentable sugars (glucose + fructose)……………          20 
•  potassium tartrate  (ash)………………………………..         1. 50 
•  other mineral salts (ash)………………………………..         0. 20 
•  free acids (tartaric, malic and others)…………………         0.25 
•  other materials (protein, amino acids, pectin, lip id)…..        0.05   
•  vitamins are present in the must at levels that ar e low but still sufficient 
for yeast growth. 
 
This example of must has a specific gravity of 1.083, equivalent to 20 o Brix. 
 
 
4. Harvesting and Grape Pressing to Produce Must 
 
Perhaps the most important task of the winemaker (a lso called the ‘vintner’) is to 
choose the timing of the harvest. This is critical for both the yield and the quality of 
the juice. As the berries grow into grapes, the jui ce accumulates acids such as 
tartaric and malic acid that are important because the juice should have both 
sweetness and acidity.  
 
The fresh pressed juice has a pH value of about 3.6 , the range for different 
varieties & climates being from about 2.8 to 4.5. T his is well on the acidic side of 
neutral (pH 7.0), a very important factor (see below).  
 
The sugar content remains low until a critical poin t is reached when the grapes 
begin to ripen and the sugar content rises rapidly to its maximum value that could 
be about 20% by weight. Glucose and fructose are th e two fermentable sugars 
that are accumulated by grapes, their content being  measured by the specific 
gravity of the juice. 
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1C: Preparation of Grape Must  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
In choosing the exact harvest time, the vintner has two major factors to consider: 
•  the content of sugar in the juice and  
•  the acidity of the juice. 
 
The gravity can be obtained quickly by using a hydr ometer. This is a glass 
instrument with a floatation bulb connected to a st em that has a scale of marks on 
it. A sample of grapes is pressed to extract the juice. The hydrometer is allowed to 
float in the juice and a reading is taken on the sc ale at the level at which it settles 
in the juice. 
 
Gravity varies with temperature so the temperature of the juice must be taken at 
the time of the hydrometer reading. A correction to  the reading is added or 
subtracted as indicated by the temperature. The sta ndard temperature for 
hydrometer readings is usually 20 ºC. 
 
At the correct time, the grapes are harvested, usua lly by machine but in some 
vineyards by hand. The berries are then crushed or pressed to release the juice. 
The juice is called ‘the grape must’, or simply ‘must’. 
 
The crushing process should be controlled carefully  to avoid affecting the flavour 
of the spirit distilled from the wine: 
•  the time from harvesting the grapes to inoculating  the fermentation should 
be as short as possible to reduce the chance of infection, 
•  the crushing should be gentle to avoid unwanted fl avours in the spirit 
(‘green’ or ‘kerosene’ aroma) and 
•  the release of too much solids into the must can a ffect the flavour of the 
spirit (harsh, spirit character due to an increased level of higher alcohols). 
 
 
5. Treatment of must 
 
Three types of must treatment might be carried out: 
1. the possible removal of solids,  
2. the possible addition of sulphur dioxide (SO 2), called ‘sulphiting’,  
3. the possible addition of yeast nutrients to the must. 
 
5.1. Removal of solids 
In some regions the removal of solids is traditiona lly carried out, for instance in 
RSA. In other countries it is not, for instance in France. The removal of solids 
might reduce the amount of yeast nutrients present in the must. It is also thought 
that the removal of solids leads to a different pro duction of flavour compounds by 
the yeast.  
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1C: Preparation of Grape Must  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
 
5.2. ‘Sulphiting’ 
The ideal manner of dealing with fresh must is to f erment it immediately; freshly 
pressed must is unstable. Changes take place as soo n as the grape berries are 
no longer intact: 
•  some components of the must react with oxygen from  the air in a process 
called oxidation that can cause unwanted flavours to develop and 
•  yeasts naturally present on the grape skins or in the environment could 
begin fermenting the must. 
 
Sulphur dioxide and the chemical compounds called s ulphites can react with 
oxygen in the must and thus prevent oxidation occur ring. In addition, they provide 
further inhibition of the growth of microorganisms,  the more sulphite added and 
the lower the pH value, the greater the inhibition.  The vintner has to take care to 
use the minimum amount of sulphites so that the fer mentation starts well when 
the yeast is added. 
 
The chemicals most commonly used for sulphiting are: 
•  potassium metabisulphite, added as a solid and  
•  sulphur dioxide, added as a gas or as a solution i n water, for instance as 
5% SO 2. 
 
In some distilling regions sulphiting is forbidden by law. 
 
5.3. Adding yeast nutrients. 
 
Must normally contains almost all of the nutrients needed for the yeast’s complete 
fermentation. The nitrogen-containing compounds tha t yeast can take in and use 
(assimilate) are together called the ‘available nit rogen’ or the ‘free amino nitrogen’ 
(FAN). The amount of available nitrogen in the must can be measured. 
 
A certain amount of available nitrogen is needed fo r the yeast to grow at the start 
of fermentation. If there is not enough yeast growt h, the following effects might 
occur: 
•  fermentation proceeding more slowly than normal, 
•  fermentations not reaching completion, the so-call ed stuck fermentations 
and 
•  the development of unwanted or unpleasant flavours . 
 
If the amount of available nitrogen in the must is below about 140mg per litre 
(140mg/ l -1) supplementation might be needed. However, some mu sts ferment 
very well despite having less available nitrogen than this. 
 
The compound usually used to provide the extra nitr ogen is diammonium 
phosphate. This has the advantage of also providing  phosphate ions that quickly 
assimilated by the yeast cells. 
 
Ammonium sulphate is another source of available ni trogen that is commonly 
used. Other nutrients that contain available nitrogen, phosphate and vitamins can 
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1C: Preparation of Grape Must  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
be used with the exception of urea. Urea should nev er be used for beverage 
alcohol production as it can be converted into ethy l carbamate, which is a 
carcinogen (a cancer-producing chemical). 
 
 
6. Fermentation Conditions 
 
6.1. Fermentation for brandy manufacture 
 
There is a great deal of variation in the conditions of the fermentations of wine that 
is going to be distilled into brandy. Only the basi c principles are covered in this 
section. 
 
White grape varieties are the ones usually used for  brandy production although 
red wine grapes can also used.  
The pattern of fermentation for brandy production i s very similar to that for table 
wine production. A large amount of brandy is produced from surplus table wine. 
 
This is partly because of the grapes used, for inst ance white grapes are often 
fermented at low temperatures, at or below 15 ºC.  
In contrast red wines are often fermented at higher  temperatures, for instance 
about 25 ºC. In some regions the grapes that can be used are limited to a few 
named varieties. In other regions there is no limitation. 
 
Three typical factors for wine fermentations are: 
 
•  a high specific gravity, often above 1.080 (above 19.3 ºBrix) 
•  low initial pH value and  
•  relatively low temperature fermentation. 
 
Factors 1 and 2 are the natural result of the compo sition of the must, specifically 
the high concentration of sugars and acids. Low tem perature fermentation is used 
to obtain wine of the desired flavour; wine ferment ed at cool temperature is often 
described as being fruitier than that fermented at high temperature. White wines 
are generally fermented at about 15 ºC and red wines at about 25ºC. 
 
Wine fermentations are of long duration, often as l ong as 14 days. This is due to 
the combined effects of factors 1, 2 and 3 above. A  high specific gravity slows the 
growth of all micro-organisms including yeast becau se the high osmotic pressure 
limits the rate at which they can take in water.  
Low pH also slows the initial rate of fermentation, as does a low temperature. 
 
The size of the yeast inoculum depends on the natur e of the must, the anticipated 
temperature profile, whether sulphites have been us ed or not and so on. A 
workable inoculation rate is 5 x 10 6 cells per ml of must. 
 
 
 
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1C: Preparation of Grape Must  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
 
6.2. Fermentation for neutral spirit manufacture 
 
Relatively large quantities of wine are distilled into neutral spirit in some regions of 
the world. This is because: 
•  certain regions produce more wine than can be sold  and/or 
•  it is better to make good quality neutral spirit f rom poor quality wine that 
would otherwise be effluent. 
 
In these cases the distiller has no control over the quality of the wine being offered 
to the distillery. The wine will simply be bought on the basis of the alcohol content. 
 
6.3. Pure Culture Yeast and Natural Fermentations 
 
(a) Selection of yeast (Pure yeast cultures) 
 
A further vital part of the vintner’s job is to cho ose the yeast that will be used to 
ferment the must into wine.  
 
The criteria for strain selection are: 
 
1. production of wine with the desired flavour prof ile, 
2. production of a high alcohol yield and 
3. tolerance of the fermentation system in general including resistance to 
inhibition by sulphites. 
 
It is possible for the winemaker to find suitable s trongly fermenting yeast strains in 
the mixture of yeasts in a spontaneous fermentation.  
 
Alternatively, a strain could be obtained from a ne arby winery. The strain can then 
be kept in a laboratory refrigerator and be grown u p through successive stages to 
produce enough yeast to inoculate the must in the f ermentation vessel. This 
process is called the yeast culture preparation.  
 
In almost all cases the chosen strain belongs to th e yeast species 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  
 
If the winemaker wants to avoid the need for yeast culture preparation, the 
alternative is to buy dried wine yeasts from a spec ialist manufacturer. These 
yeasts must be rehydrated before being used to inoculate the must. 
 
 
(b) Spontaneous fermentation 
In some regions of the world, the grapes have a sma ll amount of suitable yeast 
cells on their skins. In these regions, the vintner  has the option of allowing nature 
to take its course.  
 
A spontaneous fermentation develops in which there should be two phases: 
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1C: Preparation of Grape Must  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
 
•  initially the weakly fermenting yeasts and some ba cteria produce a small 
amount of alcohol and acids plus some flavour compounds, then 
•  strongly fermentative strains of the species Sacch aromyces cerevisiae  take 
over and complete the fermentation. 
  
Spontaneous fermentation could have two advantages for the winemaker: 
 
•  the wine flavour might be better than that produce d by pure culture yeast 
and 
•  there is no need to buy or culture a yeast. 
 
The disadvantage of using spontaneous fermentation is that there is no control 
over the first phase and, more critically, sometime s the second phase comes too 
slowly, allowing non-typical flavours to develop.  
 
It is the uncertainty of spontaneous fermentation t hat has led most winemakers to 
use pure cultures of yeast. 
 
 
 