1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.6. Cooking & Mashing in Grain 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 1A: Raw Materials & Preparation 
of Cereal Wort 
 
Unit 1A.6 – Cooking and Mashing in Grain 
Distilleries 
 
1A.6.1.  Preparation of Wort from a Mash Bill high in Unmalted 
Cereal, with a small proportion of Malted Barley 
 
 
In this type of mash bill (which may consist of 85 – 90% unmalted cereal, plus 10 – 
15% malted barley), the saccharification enzymes co me from malted barley. 
Therefore the process is similar to that described for the 100% malt mash (in 1A.5), 
particularly as regards the temperature at which the conversion takes place. 
 
The main difference is that most of the starch to b e saccharified comes from 
unmalted grain, often maize and wheat. As described  above, in unit 1A.5, the starch 
granules in malted barley are partly broken down in  the malting process, they 
gelatinize at a relatively low temperature of about  64 ºC. Starch granules in maize and 
wheat on the other hand gelatinize at higher temper atures , can be heavily encased 
in protein, and are enclosed in undegraded cell walls.so require cooking. 
 
When malted barley is being used as a source of enz ymes to convert the gelatinized 
starch to sugars, it also provides its share of the total starch needed. As in 100% malt 
whisky production, the malt must be milled and mash ed to release the enzymes and 
allow them to disperse into the liquid of the mash. 
 
In contrast to the use of malted barley in malt whi sky production, relatively intact 
husks are not necessary; either the wort is filtere d on a series of sieves or it is 
pumped to the fermentation vessel without any filtr ation. Therefore, the malt is 
ground to fine flour in a hammer mill for ease of mixing into the rest of the mash. 
 
The required quantity of malt is added to the coole d maize mash at a temperature of 
about 64 ºC. This is often done in the fermentation vessel it self. As soon as the vessel 
has received the correct amount of mash, the temperature is reduced to that required 
for the start of fermentation (15 to 25 ºC) and the yeast is added immediately. 
 
The specific gravity of the wort usually lies withi n the range 1.060 to 1.080 and the 
pH value in the region of 5.5 to 5.8. Maltose and maltotriose are the main sugars in  
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.6. Cooking & Mashing in Grain 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
the wort, together with smaller amounts of glucose and maltotetraose. All of these 
sugars can be fermented by suitable yeast strains. 
 
A significant amount of starch remains to be conver ted to sugar in the early stages of 
fermentation. Without this secondary conversion, th e alcohol yield would be about 
15% lower. 
 
1A.6.2. Preparation of Wort from 100% Unmalted Cereal and   
              Microbial Enzymes 
 
Microbial enzymes have at least three advantages over malt enzymes for the distiller: 
•  they give more alcohol yield per tonne of grain, t he yield is between 4 and 
10% higher, 
•  they avoid the processing involved in the use of m alt, 
•  the enzyme preparation may be more tolerant of dif ferent pH and temperature 
than the malt enzymes. 
 
The unmalted cereal, usually maize or wheat which a re relatively cheap compared to 
malt, is cooked and cooled as described above and t he enzymes are added. This 
can be done in the fermentation vessel. 
 
The conditions under which to add the enzymes are v ery important. There will be an 
optimal set of conditions, those that give the best result, the highest alcohol yield. 
 
The optimal conditions may be those recommended by the manufacturer. 
Alternatively, the conditions might be those devise d empirically (the method of trial 
and error) by the distiller. However the optimal co nditions when found, they must be 
employed exactly for every mash, because deviations  are likely to lead to loss of 
yield. The yeast is added to the wort as soon as possible. 
 
The specific gravity of the wort is usually in the range 1.060 to 1.080 and the pH 
value about 5.8. Glucose is the only sugar present in the wort. 
Only a small amount of starch remains to be converted to sugar in the early stages of 
fermentation, so ‘secondary conversion’ is not as i mportant as it is in malt 
saccharified mashes. 
 
1A.6.2.1.  The selection of Exogenous Enzymes  
 
In the production of Scotch Whisky, only endogenous  enzymes are allowed. This 
means that the only enzymes permitted are those pre sent in the raw materials, which 
in practice means the malt and yeast.   
 
Exogenous enzymes are permitted in the production o f GNS. They are used in the 
conversion of starch to sugars in mashing and can, if desired, totally replace the use 
of malt. These enzymes are extracted from microbial  sources (bacteria & fungi) by 
specialist enzyme companies. They are sold as purif ied preparations of specific type 
and power of activity and recommended conditions of  use. All enzyme preparations 
have to be selected carefully and targeted at the requirement of each individual  
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.6. Cooking & Mashing in Grain 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
distillery. Enzyme supplying companies offer advice  on the conditions of use as 
defined by four criteria: 
•  the type and quantity of starch to be broken down,   
•  the prevailing pH and temperature at the point of use, 
•  the equipment being used  and  
•  the time available. 
 
The types that are used in GNS production for starc h breakdown are α-amylase 
and amyloglucosidase (sometimes called glucoamylase). In some 
cases, pullulanase and protease might also be used.  
 
These enzymes can accomplish an almost complete con version of starch to 
fermentable sugar.  
Thus, the yield of alcohol in GNS production is pot entially higher than that in Scotch 
Whisky production. 
 
 (a) alpha-Amylase 
This enzyme breaks the starch molecule into smaller  units, called branched 
maltodextrins and oligosaccharides, but produces so me maltose and maltotriose. 
Important physical effects of this enzyme are incre ased liquefaction and a reduction 
of the viscosity of a starch suspension. Microbial α-amylase preparations act in a 
similar manner to the malt enzyme chemically. Howev er, they are can work at higher 
temperature and lower pH than the malt enzymes.  
 
 (b) Amyloglucosidase (glucoamylase) 
Amyloglucosidase is a saccharification enzyme, that  is to say it can convert nearly all 
of the maltodextrins to glucose. It breaks down α1-4 bonds of the linear parts of the 
starch molecule quickly and α 1-6 bonds of the branched parts slowly. This is an  
advantage over the malt enzymes, which cannot break  the α 1-6 bonds. Again, the 
commercial preparations are very stable in relatively extreme conditions such as high 
temperature. 
 
 (c) Pullulanase (debranching enzyme or limit dextr inase in malt) 
This enzyme is specific for the breakdown of α 1-6 bonds. It is also known as 
debranching enzyme because the α 1-6 bonds are the branch points of some of the 
starch molecules. It would be used in combination with amyloglucosidase. 
 (d) Protease 
In wheat, the starch granules are encased in a protein matrix. Proteases can be used 
to hydrolyse the protein. This exposes the starch g ranules and improves the 
effectiveness of the alpha-amylase. Proteases in us e include: neutral protease of 
microbial origin; the plant enzyme, papain and a ‘s ide’ activity of some preparations 
of amyloglucosidase.   
 
 (e) Other activities 
When enzymes are extracted from biological material , it is usual for more than one 
type of enzyme to be present. The subsequent partial purification of the target  
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.6. Cooking & Mashing in Grain 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
enzyme is designed to remove unwanted enzymes and t o concentrate the one 
needed. However, one or more of the minor enzyme co nstituents might be of use in 
the final application. An example is the possible p resence of protease and/or β-
glucanase in amyloglucosidase 
 
 
 
1A.6.3. Cereal Cooking  
 
The purpose of cooking is to gelatinize the starch granules in cereals that are not 
malted. Maize and wheat are the main unmalted cereals used by distillers. 
 
Gelatinized starch is accessible for saccharificati on by enzymes, but ungelatinized 
starch is not. The gelatinization is achieved by co oking the grains. Many different 
methods of cooking are used. The following is one e xample that illustrates the basic 
principles of most cooking methods: 
 
1. grain, for instance maize, is mixed with warm wa ter in a slurry vessel, using 
about two and a half tonnes of water per tonne of grain, 
1. when this is well mixed, it is transferred to a pressure vessel fitted with a stirrer 
to gently mix the grain as it is cooking, 
2. steam is injected into the cooker to raise the p ressure above that of the 
atmosphere to achieve a temperature of 130 ºC, 
3. this temperature is held for 5 minutes and the s team supply is cut off, 
4. then the vessel is opened in a carefully regulat ed way to remove the contents, 
this is called blowdown, and finally 
5. the cooked cereal is cooled to below 70 ºC as quickly as possible. 
 
Variations to this process include: 
•  hammer milling the grain to a flour to help mixing  and gelatinization and 
•  the addition of backset (stillage from the beer co lumn of the continuous 
still) to the water, reducing the water usage rate. 
 
The combination of the cooking and sudden release o f pressure ensures that the 
starch in the maize is completely gelatinized and i n perfect condition for the 
saccharification enzymes. 
 
(a) Batch cooking 
 
Cooking is carried out in pressure vessels that are  equipped with stirrers in order to 
prevent the grain from settling and cooking unevenl y. Cookers vary in load capacity 
from about 2 tonnes to about 20 tonnes. Whole or mi lled grain is added to the vessel 
with the appropriate amount of water.  
In some distilleries, backset (spent wash) may be added along with the fresh water.  
 
Steam is then injected into the vessel to flush out  all air at which point the vessel 
vents are closed and the steam injection continued until the desired pressure is 
attained. The steam used for direct injection must be “pure water” steam. 
 
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.6. Cooking & Mashing in Grain 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Three factors determine the effectiveness of cooking: 
•  the pressure and temperature reached (these are di rectly linked), 
•  the duration of the elevated pressure conditions a nd  
•  the solid/liquid ratio in the cooking vessel. 
 
Cooking conditions vary widely between grain distil leries. The following table 
compares a low pressure, short duration cook with a high-pressure cook. 
 
 
 LOW 
TEMPERATURE 
HIGH 
TEMPERATURE 
Time to reach hold temp.(mins)                    80 40 
Maximum temp.( oC)                                                                       103 150 
Hold pressure (psig)                                                                          15 68 
Hold time (mins)                                              0 30 
 
 
 
 (b) Continuous Cooking 
 
Continuous cooking equipment is more complex in con struction and more difficult to 
control and to clean than batch cooking plant. This  is at least partly due to the need 
to maintain ‘steady-state’ to achieve the required cook without overcooking and 
energy waste.  
 
Factors common to the various types of continuous system are: 
 
•  fine ground cereal, e.g. wheat through a hammer mi ll, to aid quick cooking, 
•  addition of a small amount of malt, the ‘pre-malt’ , to reduce the viscosity of the 
slurry (action of alpha-amylase converting the larg e starch molecules into the 
smaller dextrins); in gns production microbial alpha-amylase is used. 
•  grain slurry pumped through a relatively narrow tu be,   
•  control of residence time,  
•  use of high pressure and temperature which can be higher than those 
economically achievable in batch cooking  
 
 
 (c) Cooling after Cooking 
 
At the planned time, the contents of the cooking ve ssel are blown by the internal 
pressure of the vessel to the mash tun, or holding (conversion) vessel, or to the 
washback.  
Temperature control is vital, each distillery havin g a target final mash temperature. 
This is often about 63 oC.   
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.6. Cooking & Mashing in Grain 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
However, throughput constraints or other operationa l factors could require a quite 
different cooling regime with the cooked material b eing added directly to the 
washback with the malt slurry. 
 
Cooling of the cooked grain can be achieved in a variety of ways:  
•  by drawing a vacuum in the cooker, 
•  by using flash/vacuum vessels, 
•  in a heat exchanger between the cooker and the mas h tun, 
•  or by simultaneous addition of cold water to the m ash tun at blow down.   
 
It is possible to supplement the cold water with ba ckset, which is acidic and can help 
accelerate the breakdown of cereals in the cooker. The malt grist can be added to 
either the cooker or the mash tun as long as the temperature is appropriate. 
 
In summary, the procedures for cooling the cooked g rain and the sequence of the 
transfer to the washback can differ widely in different distilleries.  
 
All distilleries have the objective of achieving th eir desired throughput and their target 
conversion temperature from the first moment when the malt meets the grain.  
 
 
 
1A.6.4. The Principles and Purpose of Mashing (malt and enzymic). 
 
The major objective of mashing and wort preparation  is to extract all of the available 
carbohydrate from the raw materials and present it to the yeast in a fermentable form 
A subsidiary but important objective is to extract other materials: 
•  that provide the yeast with nutrients leading to a  successful fermentation 
and 
•  other materials that will eventually contribute to  the flavour of the new 
make spirit.  
 
Various quite different procedures are employed suc cessfully in the preparation of 
cereal based worts for Scotch Whisky and GNS production, 
It must be stressed that although it takes time to saccharify starch using the malt 
enzymes (or in G NS production, the exogenous enzym es), it is not necessary to 
have all of this complete before starting fermentat ion. The final portion of conversion 
that takes place in the early stages of fermentatio n is known as 'secondary 
conversion'. In many distilleries at least 1 5% of the starch saccharification remains to 
be completed in the washback. 
At the other extreme, in some distilleries simultan eous saccharification and 
fermentation is practised. For instance, in a Scotc h Whisky grain distillery it would be 
possible to add the malt suspension along with the cooked and cooled wheat (plus 
the additional water needed) to the washback and ad d the yeast at the same time. 
Thus, the process stage called wort preparation tha t is described below can be 
reduced to a minimum of mixing cereal suspensions in the washback. 
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.6. Cooking & Mashing in Grain 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Mashing is the process where the milled and/or cook ed cereal is mixed intimately 
with hot water at the appropriate striking temperat ure (under specified conditions) to 
achieve the required temperature in the mash.  
 
The conditions chosen by each distillery are vital in obtaining: 
•  optimal extraction of potentially fermentable carb ohydrate  from the cereal, 
and  
•  optimal conversion of the carbohydrate to fermenta ble sugars. 
 
When present, protein-degrading enzymes (proteases)  could produce smaller 
molecules such as amino acids that can have a benef icial effect on yeast growth 
early in fermentation. Malt contains some protease. 
In most malt distilleries a mashing-in machine (Steel’s masher) is used. 
Purified and concentrated enzyme preparations (know n as exogenous enzymes 
because they do not enter the production system in the malt or the yeast) may be 
used for GNS wort preparation. The examples shown b elow include two such 
enzymes, amyloglucosidase and pullulanase.  
‘Conversion’ or ‘saccharification’ are the terms us ed to describe the enzymic 
production of fermentable wort from starch. 
The conversion of starch from unmalted cereal by th e enzymes from malted barley is 
exactly the same as shown in the malt mashing section 1A.4.   
 
In the presence of the exogenous enzymes (i.e. exte rnally added), amyloglucosidase 
and pullulanase, the attack on the starch molecule is different. Amyloglucosidase can 
break  all of the linkages between the glucose mole cules (including the branch 
points) by itself although the branch points are br oken more slowly.. If heat resistant 
pullulanase is used along with amyloglucosidase, th e pullulanase specifically and 
quickly attacks the branch chain link allowing the amyloglucosidase  to rapidly 
convert the debranched molecules to glucose. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pullulanase 
Branch Linkage 
Glucose 
Reducing 
End 
Enzyme 
Action 
Point 
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.6. Cooking & Mashing in Grain 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Thus, glucose will be almost the only sugar present  in the wort. It is possible for malt 
to be used, for its enzymes or other reasons, in ad dition to exogenous enzymes in 
GNS production 
 
The range of sugars produced during conversion dete rmines the fermentability of the 
wort. If the enzyme attack is complete, the wort wi ll be very fermentable. If the 
enzyme attack is incomplete, the wort will be only partially fermentable. Enzymes are 
very sensitive to the conditions that they work in.  They are affected by how much 
water is present, temperature and pH or mash acidit y. They take time to work, so the 
length of time that is allowed for mash conversion will affect the degree of 
conversion. 
 
In the production of GNS, added enzymes are allowed . The main ones in use are 
alpha-amylase, amyloglucosidase (an alternative nam e is glucoamylase) and 
pullulanase, all of microbial origin. The action of  microbial alpha-amylase is the same 
as that of malt. Amyloglucosidase works its way alo ng the dextrin sugar chain 
releasing glucose molecules as it progresses. Pullu lanase is a starch debranching 
enzyme. The stability and temperature and pH optima  of these exogenous enzymes 
vary according to their source. 
 
In general, these exogenous enzyme preparations are  more stable than malt 
enzymes.  
Wort produced by exogenous enzymes alone (no malt used) contains only glucose, a 
sugar that is easily fermented by a wider range of yeast strains than is the case with 
the malt mashes used in Scotch Whisky production. 
 
 
 
There are optimum conditions for mashing and these are illustrated in the table 
below : 
 
 
Condition Low Optimum High 
Temperature.  Low temperatures do not 
affect the enzymes much, 
but the starch must be 
gelatinized first. 
Gelatinization temperature 
for malt starch is 60-65 °C. 
65 °C High temperatures 
inactivate enzymes, 
including α and ß 
amylases and limit 
dextrinase. 
The action of amylases 
is stopped at 
temperatures over 
70 °C. 
pH. Acidic conditions kill the 
enzymes. Enzyme action is 
stopped at pHs below 5.0 
5.4 High pHs slow enzyme 
action, but it does 
continue at pHs of 7 or 
above. 
9 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.6. Cooking & Mashing in Grain 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
Water. 
(Mash 
thickness) 
Enzymes are more sensitive 
to heat in a thin mash. 
There is a lower 
concentration of enzyme and 
starch in a thin mash.  
Between 2.5 
and 3.5 litres 
of water per 
kilogram of 
dry grist.  
Enzymes are less 
sensitive to heat in a 
thick mash. There is a 
higher concentration of 
enzyme and starch in a 
thick mash.  
Time. Enzymes take time to attack 
the starch. Conversion will 
be incomplete in less than 30 
minutes.  
30 minutes Conversion will be 
almost complete after 
30 minutes. A longer 
time will not increase 
the yield of sugar but 
may make it more 
fermentable, but not if 
the temperature is 
~65 O C. 
 
 
In general, grain distillers do not use a similar e quation to that used in determining 
the extract from malt They rely on simple but effec tive indicators in order to ensure 
that mashing has proceeded as normal. Gravity and p H are the main indicators, 
combined with a close watch being kept on temperatu re during the stage of the 
primary conversion of the cooked starch. In those d istilleries where the grain is 
crushed before cooking, mash samples will be checke d for presence of whole corns, 
an indicator of screen failure. 
A higher gravity than normal may indicate overcooki ng of the grain. A lower gravity 
could indicate lower than normal conversion, concer ning which the temperature and 
pH history are highly relevant. Too high a temperat ure on too low a pH would lead to 
a more rapid inactivation of the malt conversion en zyme complex. This is critical in 
grain distilling because malt is a relatively expen sive source of starch compared with 
other grains. There is thus a permanent incentive f or the grain distiller to consider the 
minimum amount of malt that would provide sufficien t enzyme activity to convert the 
starch in both the malt and the cooked cereal. 
 
 
 
 
1A.6.5. Wort Separation and Cooling. 
 
In some grain distilleries the entire mash, includi ng residues from the wheat or maize 
and malt is carried forward to the fermenter (to ac hieve higher alcohol yields), and in 
some the wort is separated from the spent grains in  a mash tun or on filters of 
various types. Wort is separated from the spent malt grains in every malt distillery. 
When conversion is complete, the mash will consist of a sugar solution called wort 
and the husks of the malted barley. The purpose of wort separation is to remove 
these husks and any other particles that are not wanted in the wort. 
The objectives of effective wort separation are the  removal of unwanted material 
while at the same time extracting all the available wort. 
 
10 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.6. Cooking & Mashing in Grain 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Effective wort separation means : 
•  Maximising extract recovery. 
•  Absence of particles in the wort. 
•  Absence of starch in the wort. 
 
To achieve these objectives, wort separation systems use some common principles : 
•  Filtration using the husk as a fine filter support ed by the slotted base in the 
case of a mash or lauter tun. 
•  Control of wort flow to ensure wort clarity and ma ximise filtration efficiency. 
•  Sparging with hot waters to extract the maximum am ount of soluble extract 
(wort). 
•  Spent grain (waste husk) removal and disposal on c ompletion of filtration. 
There are many systems in which wort can be separat ed from the mash, the most 
common in the Whisky industry being : 
•  The traditional mash tun. 
•  The lauter mash tun. 
•  the semi-lauter mash tun 
•  the mash filter 
 
The operation of different wort separation and cool ing systems is described in the 
previous unit on malt mashing and the systems used in grain distilling are essentially 
the same. 
 
The wort that leaves the cooling system is now read y for the next stage of 
fermentation.  
 
It should have the following characteristics:- 
 
•  The required mixture of sugars, most of which will  ferment into alcohol  
•  It should contain soluble protein. Barley protein will have been broken down into 
soluble form, for example into amino acids. Soluble  protein is required in the wort 
because it provides food for the yeast. 
•  A temperature that suits the yeast and encourages a start to fermentation. 
•  Absence of any spoilage micro-organisms. 
•  Traces of materials like calcium and zinc which ar e essential for healthy yeast 
growth.  
•  Other nutrients that will encourage yeast growth, for example oxygen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 