1 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort 
- Summary 
Introduction - the major cereals, sources of enzymes 
and yeast used in distilling 
 
It is not possible to cover, in these notes, all o f the starch -containing cereals 
or other sources of starch that are used worldwide for the production of spirits. 
Instead, the basic principles of spirit manufactured by fermenting cereal 
extracts are described using the raw materials: maize, wheat and rye , barley 
and malted barley, and microbial enzymes. The latter are used in distilling for 
the conversion of cereal starch to fermentable sugars when they are not 
converted by the enzymes from malted barley. This list is not meant to be 
exclusive; other cere als and other sources of starch are used, for instance 
rice, sorghum and potatoes. 
 
Cereals are used for three reasons: 
 as a source of  carbohydrate for fermentation, 
 for their contribution to the flavour of the distilled spirits and 
 in the case of barley only, as a source of enzymes for the conversion of  
starch to fermentable sugars after the barley has been malted. 
 
 
All cereals selected for distilling must be: 
  undamaged and disease free 
 uncontaminated with other cereals, weed seeds or any other detritus  
 have the correct dry matter content (neither too much nor too little water) 
and 
 contain an appropriate amount of starch  
 
 
The seeds of cereals convert sugar from the growing plant to  starch, which is 
the carbohydrate stored in the seed as a food reserv e for the future 
regeneration of the plant. Cereals are grown commercially for their seeds, 
which we call the „grains‟., since the starch and protein in the grains are 
important sources of food  for both human consumption and animal feed. 
However, to make potable spirit this starch must be be converted back to 
fermentable sugar, since starch itself is not fermentable by yeast.  Much of 
this section deals with the manner in which distillers produce fermentable 
sugars from the starch and extract them so that they can be fermented by 
yeast. 
 
2 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
There are three principal means of obtaining fermentable extract from 
cereals: 
 Exclusively from malted barley using the indigenous enzymes of the 
           malt 
 From a mixture of unmalted cereal  and malted barley again using the 
           indigenous enzymes from the malt 
 From unmalted cereal using exogenous bacterial or fungal enzymes  
 
In the latter case the enzymes are bought in from specialist suppliers and can 
therefore be regarded as a separate raw material. 
 
The fermentation of the sugars obtained by mashing is carried out by yeast, 
which represents the third major raw material purchased by the distiller. Pure 
cultured yeast can be provided by specialist suppliers or surplus yeast can be 
purchased from brewers. Cultu red yeast can either be used on its own or 
admixed with brewers yeast. The latter is never used on its own since it 
cannot provide as high a spirit yield as the various forms of cultured yeast 
which are now available. 
 
The following sub -sections describe i n more detail the sourcing and/or the  
manufacture of each of these three groups of raw materials. 
 
 
  
3 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
1.  Barley and the Malting Process 
 
1.1. Barley 
Malting Barley
 
 
Barley ( Botanical name Hordeum polystichum – a member of the grass 
family) is a plant similar to wheat but is hardier, growing well in a cool 
temperate climate. Although its starch content is lower than that of maize and 
wheat, at about 65% dry weight, it is an important plant for distillers. It is 
normally germinated by steeping in water , drained and aera ted and then 
dried (kilned) to produce malted barley, sometimes called simply „malt‟.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barley malt is particularly useful for distillers because: 
 it can make a significant contribution to the flavour of whisky and 
 it is a good source of enzymes that convert starch to sugar. 
 
Small amounts of unmalted barley are used for some whiskies, for instance 
Irish whiskey, for the purpose of flavour contribution. However, most of the 
barley for distilling is malted in order to generate a high enzyme level wit hin 
the grains. 
 
The barley selected for processing into malt must meet certain specific 
requirements. It must: 
 
 be free of contaminants such as weed seeds and any other harvest 
debris, free from plant infections such as fungus and moulds, and  be 
physically undamaged (i.e. no broken corns)  
 
 have a moisture content of 12% or slightly less to allow safe storage of 
the grain and to preserve the enzymes that are present, 
 have  more than 98% of the grains capable of germination and have  
no pregermination (i.e. grains sprouting at harvest or in store),  
 have its total nitrogen content as low as possible - in the range 1.2 -
1.8% for malt distilling and between 1.8% and 2.0% for grain distilling. 

4 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
(N.B. the nitrogen content is an indirect measure of the total amou nt of 
protein in the grain and the lower the percentage of protein  the higher 
the starch content (there is no simple way of measuring the starch 
directly) but higher protein barleys can  produce higher levels of 
enzymes for grain distilling at the expense  of a lower starch content 
and hence lower fermentable extract). 
 have large grains (i.e.with high potential extract) of the same size to 
give same rate of modification and easy processing in the distillery and  
 be a variety that malts readily and quickly 
 
The diagram below illustrates the key features of the barley corn. It shows the 
embryo that produces the root and shoot. It also shows the location of the 
starch granules and the protecting cell wall structure.  
 
 
 
1.2 The Malting Process - Conversion of barley to malt 
 
The starch granules in the barley endosperm are protected by being 
embedded in a matrix of protein. This matrix is surrounded by cell walls 
containing a gum called -glucan. When barley germinates, it needs to get 
access to the starch for its food and convert it to sugars, so: 
 The germ  begins to form a root and a shoot, which stimulates the 
production of plant hormones  ,  
 These hormones then stimuli te the production of enzymes in the 
aleurone layer and these enzymes diffuse into the endos perm and 
break down the cell walls  and protein matrix,, so exposing  the starch 
granules.  
Close up of the 
starchy 'endosperm'
Starch granules
Gum cell wall
Protein
Husk
       Aleurone layer
Shoot
Root
EndospermGerm
BARLEY
CORN
5 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
 The aleurone then generates more enzymes which would eventually 
break down all of the starch to sugars if the grain was left to germinate 
long enough. 
 
It is the la st of these three things that is important for the distiller. The starch -
degrading enzymes in malt are used to break down the starch in the malt 
grains or in any unmalted cereal that the distiller may choose to use, maize or 
wheat for example.  
 
In malting the barley, there are three objectives: 
1. to produce malt grains with a high content of enzymes, 
2. to start the conversion of starch to sugar by removing the endosperm 
cell walls and 
3. do this with as low a loss of starch as possible.  
 
 
This is done in three stages by: 
1. steeping the barley grains in water in a staged process of submerging 
them under water and draining the water off for a time (resting) in order 
to reach a grain water content of about 45%, then 
2. transferring the grains to a suitable vessel through  which moist air is 
blown at a fixed temperature to allow even germination , (such vessels 
are also fitted with mechanical turners so that the growing grain can be 
gently turned form time to time to prevent matting), then  
3. stopping the germination (killing  the embryo) and preserving the 
enzyme content by gently drying the grains by blowing warm dry air 
through the malt bed.. 
 
The malting process is illustrated in the flowing diagram. 
     
 
 
 
Dried malted barley grains are simil ar in appearance to barley grains. They 
can easily be distinguished from each other by taste and bite. Barley tastes 
„mealy‟ and is hard whilst malted barley is friable and tastes slightly sweet and 
has the characteristic „malt flavour‟.  
 
Malted barley is  friable and easily milled because the endosperm cell walls 
have been broken down. The sweetness in malt is because a small amount of 
sugar has been formed from the starch. This sugar is essential for the 
development of the malt flavour during kilning. 
STEEPING 
1-2 days 
The seed is 
soaked in water 
to start it growing 
GERMINATION 
4-6 days 
The barley grows 
under controlled 
conditions and 
the changes 
occur inside the 
seed 
KILNING 
1-2 days 
The malt is dried 
6 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
1.3 The Malting Process – Steeping 
 
Barley is soaked in water to simulate the conditions that start germination or 
growth. This is carried out in a steep tank and usually the tank is aerated to 
encourage the onset of germination and to speed moisture uptake b y the 
barley. 
 
STEEPING
Water
Barley
Steep Tank
 
 
 
During steeping the grain is aerated to both mix the grains and allow even 
uptake of oxygenated water so promoting the rate of germination. 
 
1.4 The Malting Process – Germination 
 
On completion of steeping, the barley corn is allowed to grow. 
 
During germination two major changes occur.  
 
Firstly, hormones are produced which stimulate the production of enzymes by 
the aleurone layer. 
 
Secondly groups of enzymes are produced which act during the malting 
process and later during mashing. 
 
During malting these enzymes will: 
 Break down the gummy cell walls. 
 Break down the protein matrix. 
 Partially break down the starch granules, 
in a process that the maltster calls „modification‟.  
 
The maltster can influence the degree of modification during m alting by 
controlling the moisture content of the grain, its temperature and the time 
allowed for germination. 
 
During germination, the corn grows rootlets (“chits”) and a shoot.  
7 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
Roots
GERMINATING
BARLEY
Shoot
Enzymes released from 
the aleurone layer
Close up of the effect 
of enzymes on the 
endosperm.
Cell walls dissolved.
Protein dissolved.
Starch granules 
released
 
 
 
Germination usually takes place in a chamber or vessel where moist air is 
blown through the growing malt to control its temperature and moisture 
content. Turners mix the malt to prevent the growing roots from matting 
together.  
 
 
Chitting stages during germination of barley (days 1 – 4) 
 
8 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
During germination,  the grain is kept at an even temperature (12 -160C), 
aerated and humidified. The turner is used to even the conditions throughout 
the bulk of grain and can move along the length of the vessel. 
 
 
GERMINATION
Turner
Growing Barley
Air ConditioningPlant
Malting 'Box'
 
 
 
When the maltster has judged that the malt has develop ed sufficiently (i.e. 
when all the grains are evenly soft and there are no “hard ends”), it is called 
„green malt‟. This simply means malt prior to kilning. 
 
Some grain distillers choose to use green malt for its high enzyme content. 
Some think that green malt makes a significant contribution to grain nms (new 
make spirit) flavour.  
 
Green malt must be used very soon after it is produced because it continues 
to metabolise, generating heat and stimulating undesirable microbial growth. 
 
 
 
1.5 The Malting Process – Kilning (drying of green malt) 
 
In this process, most of the moisture is removed (from 45% to about 4.5%); 
the green malt becomes dried malt. It is then stable and can then be stored 
without deterioration in watertight silos. 
A combination of high gr ain moisture and high drying temperature could 
destroy the enzymes developed during germination. Some of these enzymes, 
for example those required later in the mashing process for starch and protein 
conversion, must be preserved as far as possible. Thus, t he kilning 
temperature is kept as low as practicable but an unavoidable loss of enzyme 
activity of approximately 25% occurs.  
 
9 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
KILNING
Burner
 
                                                                                                 peat furnace 
 
During the ear ly stages of kilning, peat may be burned, so that the reek 
(smoke) is absorbed by the drying malt.  
 
In the kilning process, the malt is dried at a relatively low temperature,  with an 
initial air inlet temperature of ca. 60O C using a high flow rate of air . When the 
malt has been dried to a moisture content of around 10%, the kilning 
temperature is increased to around 70 oC to complete kilning. At this point, 
some of the exhaust air can be recirculated to save energy.  
Most kilns have heat exchangers fitted to the kiln exhaust so that waste heat 
can be recovered to preheat cold air at the intake.  
Some kilns are heated indirectly using hot water or steam radiators. Some 
older kilns are heated directly using oil burners and/or peat furnaces.  
 
Malts from directly heated kilns contain higher levels of sulphur, which comes 
from the oil or peat, and it is deposited on the malt as oxides of sulphur. 
 
At the completion of kilning, the malt‟s moisture content will be 4-5%. 
 
Peated Malt 
Peated malt is used in the prod uction of certain Scotch Whiskies, particularly 
those distilled on the island of Islay. 
When the malt is to be peated, the peat is burned without a flame during the 
early stages of kilning, when the green malt‟s moisture is being reduced from 
around 50% to around 20%. At this stage the malt can best absorb peak reek 
constituents. The peat is not used as a heat source, but as a flavour source . 
 
Peat is decayed plant material that has formed over thousands of years. It is 
generally found in wetlands areas. T he type of peat formed depends on the 
plants involved (grasses, heathers and moss) and the location (inland, 
maritime). e.g. Islay, Orkney, Scottish Mainland. 
Peat is used during barley kilning as a flavour source, not as a heat source. 
The location at whi ch the peat was obtained, and its method of use strongly 
affect the flavour of the spirit produced. 
 
During kilning, the peat is burned avoiding flaming, to produce an acidic 
smoke, the peat reek. It is burned during the early stages of kilning, so that 
10 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
the combustion products adsorb to and are absorbed by the malt. These 
effects happen in the range 50 -20% moisture(i.e during the first period of 
kilning when free water is being evaporated from the surface of the malt 
grains). Careful control of combustion t emperatures is necessary to achieve 
the desired degree of peating. The best results are achieved when the peat is 
allowed to smoulder without excessive flames. .Peatiness is caused by a 
spectrum of phenolic compounds which can be destroyed if the peat furn ace 
becomes too hot. The amount within the final malt may be up to 80 ppm. 
 
1.6 The Malting Process – Summary 
 
The table below details the changes that occur during the malting process: 
 
Parameter Barley During 
Germination 
Malt 
Moisture. about 12% after 
drying 
About 46% after 
steeping, rising to 
about 50%  
4-5% after kilning 
Extractable 
carbohydrate.  
Virtually zero 
because the 
starch is 
protected. 
Very high because 
the starch granules 
have been 
released. They are 
now accessible to 
enzymes that 
convert st arch into 
sugar. 
Kilning does not 
change the level of 
extractable 
carbohydrate but it 
does fix it by 
reducing moisture 
and stopping 
germination. 
Colour. Very low. Very low. Colour is produced 
when sugars and 
soluble protein 
react together at 
high temperature. 
An increase in 
colour  indicates 
overkilning in 
distilling malts. 
Protein. Malting barleys 
have low protein 
levels, equivalent 
to about 1.5% 
nitrogen. 
The overall level of 
nitrogen does not 
change, but a lot of 
the protein is 
converted into a 
more so luble form 
(peptides and 
amino acids) by 
enzymic action 
during germination.  
Kilning does not 
change the nature 
of the proteins and 
carbohydrate but it 
does fix them by 
stopping 
germination. 
 
 
The extent to which the barley starch is made accessible and t he enzymes 
are developed is termed the „degree of modification‟.  
Malt for use in making Scotch Whisky is well modified. 
11 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
2. Malt and Malt Enzymes 
 
2.1. Malt and its Uses 
 
The distiller buying malt from a malting company must agree a specification 
because of the potentially variable nature of malt. 
 
A basic specification for distilling malt is: 
 
1. moisture of less than 5% (to preserve the enzyme content) 
2. the predicted spirit yield that can be calculated from how much material 
can be extracted from the grain (s oluble extract) and how much of the 
material extracted  can be fermented by yeast (fermentabilty), both of 
which are laboratory measurements, 
3. diastatic enzyme levels (i.e. the enzymes which break down starch); 
alpha and beta-amylase are the two main diastatic enzymes involved in 
the break down of starch to fermentable sugars. 
4. the malt should be easy to process through the stages of milling and 
mashing and there are various tests, such as friability, which can be 
used to specify  malt modification and ease of processing. 
 
Malt is important to both mashing and fermentation, particularly as a source of 
yeast nutrients and yeast growth factors (such as vitamins and minerals) and 
as a source of enzymes responsible for starch conversion to fermentable 
sugars. The husk of malted barley is also important as a filter medium during 
wort separation. 
 
Use of Green Malt 
Some grain distillers choose to use green malt (freshly produced malt that has 
not been stabilised by kilning), for its high enzyme content. Some think th at 
green malt makes a significant contribution to grain nms (new make spirit) 
flavour.  
 
Green malt must be used very soon after it is produced because it continues 
to metabolise, generating heat and stimulating undesirable microbial growth. 
Compared to dried malt, green malt has very limited storage time and must be 
used as quickly as possible. This requires very precise logistics. 
 
In distilleries using green malt, the milling is done in a wet hammer mill. The 
objective of the milling is to expose the enz ymes needed to effect conversion. 
Milled green malt has the consistency of a thin porridge, no particles being 
greater than a quarter of a corn in size. Obviously, all green malt has to be 
kept as cool as possible and used as quickly as possible, for it wo uld 
deteriorate rapidly in storage. 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
2.2. Key Malt Analytical Parameters 
 
Key analytical parameters for malt distilling malt and examples of typical 
values are: 
 
(a) Moisture  < 5 %H2O 
In the last 20 years, the moisture content has been raised from 4 to 5 % for 
two main reasons. Firstly, gentler kilning helps preserve the activities of the 
more heat-sensitive enzymes, which can continue to work during the mashing 
and fermentation, releasing more fermentable carbohydrate. Second, there is 
a saving in energy. Malt is hygroscopic (attracts water) and there is normally a 
moisture pickup of around 0.5% between maltings and distillery. So, if the 
malt is required to be 5% moisture, the off-kiln moisture should be 4.5%.  
 
Where there are adjacent maltings and distillery, it can be dried to 5%. Malt 
with moisture content of 6% or more is difficult to mill, and there is the 
possibility that „green -malt‟ sensory notes may enter the spirit from lightly 
kilned malt. However, grain distilling malt moisture content ca n be up to 6%, 
the lighter kilning preserving enzymes. 
 
(b)  Friability and     96% of corns friable 
(c ) Homogeneity    98% of corns homogeneous 
The Friabilimeter is a laboratory instrument in which a weighed amount of 
malt is subjected to pressure of a r oller pressing it against a rotating 
perforated drum. The more friable the malt due to modification, the more 
passes through the drum.  
This analysis is commonly used in malting as a check on the endosperm‟s 
modification of the malt, to determine the homogeneity of the modification and 
to measure the percentage of corns that have not grown. It is widely used in 
the plant as well as in the laboratory.  
The information obtained from the Friabilimeter, while a useful early indicator 
of the quality of malting, must be taken as complementary to laboratory 
results. In recent years, there have been severe problems with calibrating 
these instruments, and results should be treated with caution, as they are also 
variety and operator dependent. 
 
(d) Soluble Extract (SE)  > 80% of malt materials made soluble 
The units used to describe SE are „litre o/kilogram‟ or „% extract‟ (%). The two 
units are related by a factor. Both units are in use, depending on distiller‟s 
preference. 
The SE2 figure is the maximum extract that i s obtainable from the malt, as 
milling at this 0.2mm setting (fine grind) mechanically breaks up any residual 
cell wall material, releasing the starch granules. This figure varies little with 
the degree of modification of the malt. Milling at the 0.7mm set ting (coarse 
grind) (SE7) releases only the starch granules that have been made available 
because of matrix breakdown during malting, so it is a measure of the degree 
of modification of the malt. The fine/coarse difference is normally about 1%. 
Some distillers prefer to use a coarse SE figure obtained by milling the malt 
13 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
sample with a mill gap setting of 1.0mm, but the vast majority use 0.2 and 
0.7mm SE‟s. 
The SE7 figure was chosen when the Miag laboratory mill became standard 
because its values were closes t to the distillery‟s mash tun extract (mte), 
when the traditional mash tun was the norm. In the last about 30 years, there 
has been a gradual change in Scottish malt distilleries to lauter -type mash 
tuns, which have higher extraction efficiency. These tun s can achieve SE2 
levels of extract, but the SE7 figure that is the most reliable figure for 
predicting spirit yield. 
 
(e) Fermentability                    >88% of the extract obtained is fermentable 
This laboratory test is used to determine the percentag e of the SE7 that is 
fermentable, and allows calculation of the Fermentable Extract (FE7). 
 
The method of determining wort‟s Fermentability is by conducting a laboratory 
fermentation, and calculating it using the laboratory Original Gravity (OG) and 
Final Gravity (FG). Malt fermentabilities are normally up to in the range 86 -
90%. It should be noted that this laboratory test, based on IGB laboratory 
wort, is not suitable for malts that have high sulphur content or those that are 
highly modified to achieve high TSN values. 
 
(f) Fermentable Extract   >70% 
The % fermentability value multiplied by the SE7 value gives a figure for 
fermentable extract obtainable from the malt. 
The fermentable extract value is used to calculate a predicted spirit yield from 
the malt. 
 
(g) Predicted Spirit Yield (PSY) 
It is possible to predict the distillery spirit yield from the laboratory data 
described above.  
In a malt distillery, this can be done using the obtained values of the malt 
soluble extract (SE7), the % fermentability and a fixed factor: 
             PSY (lpa/t, dwb)   = fermentability (%)   x   SE7 (dwb)   x  6.06 
(where lpa/t = litres of pure alcohol per tonne, and dwb = dry weight basis). 
 
In a grain distillery, the calculation is a little more complicated due to the u se 
of both malt and wheat (or maize). The first step is to calculate separately the 
PSY of the malt and the PSY of the other cereal. Then it is an easy matter to 
calculate the PSY of the particular mash recipe in use at the time.  
 
For instance, in a disti llery using 10% malt with a PSY of 420 lpa/t and 90% 
wheat with a PSY of 370 lpa/t, the calculation and result is: 
                           420 x (10/100) + 370 x (90/100)  =375 lpa/t 
 
(h) Total Soluble Nitrogen (TSN) 
Free α-amino nitrogen in the wort is  required for the yeast growth that occurs 
at the start of fermentation. If wort is deficient in this respect, the performance 
of the yeast fermentation will be affected. TSN measurement is used when 
there is any doubt about there being enough. It is unlik ely that there will be a 
shortage in malt whisky production. Some distillers specify high TSN values, 
14 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
which tend to depress laboratory fermentability values. Grain distillery wort 
can be deficient particularly if the proportion of malt in the mash is lower  than 
9% (w/w). 
 
(i) Malt enzyme levels 
Sometimes it is necessary to measure the enzyme levels in malt. Two 
measures are used:   dextrinising units (DU) which give an indication of the 
content of alpha-amylase in the malt.This enzyme is the first enzyme to act on 
starch granules, breaking the starch down into fragments called dextrins. 
Secondly, diastatic power (DP) power which gives an indication of the content 
of beta -amylase in the malt. This second enzyme produces the major 
fermentable sugar, maltose, f rom the solubilised starch and large dextrins. 
Typical values for dried malt are: 
                          Dextrinising Units (DU)  >100 units 
                          Diastatic Power (DP)       >200 units 
 
The secondary enzymes, limit dextrinase and alp ha glucosidase (sometimes 
called maltase) play a part in secondary conversion in the wash back and are 
not routinely measured in malt. 
 
 
3. Cereals for Grain Whisky and Grain Neutral Spirit 
 
The cereals used as raw materials for spirit manufacture describe d here 
include: maize, wheat and rye, barley and malted barley, and microbial 
enzymes. This list is not meant to be exclusive; other cereals and other 
sources of starch are used, for instance rice, sorghum and potatoes. 
 
All cereals selected for distilling must be: 
 
 uncontaminated by weed seeds and any other harvest debris and free 
from any plant infections such as mould or fungus , 
 undamaged (i.e. contain no broken corns) 
 have the correct dry matter content (neither too much nor too little water) 
and 
 have the correct starch content. 
 
 
(a) Maize 
Maize or corn, Zea mays is grown in many parts of the world in warm and 
temperate climates. It is a cost effective source of carbohydrate for distillers 
containing approximately 72% starch dwb (on a dry weight basis). 
 
Maize of the highest available quality maize is best for distilling because it 
gives fewer difficulties in handling. Such maize can be used to produce about 
400 litres of pure alcohol per tonne of grain used (lpa/t). 
 
A basic specification for distilling maize is: 
 moisture, about 15% and 
15 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
 large, full kernels (to give easier processing). 
 
 
(b) Wheat 
Soft winter wheat ( Botanical names Tritium vulgare or Tritium aestivum) is a 
cereal grown in warm and temperate climates. It can produce good yields of 
grain in a colder climate than maize. Soft winter wheat contains about 69% 
dwb starch so it is a good alternative carbohydrate source to maize. 
  
Soft wheat varieties have higher starch content than the hard wheat varieties 
(Tritium durum ) and so have higher spi rit yields per tonne of grain used. 
Wheats in general give yields of 350-400 lpa/t. 
 
A basic specification for wheat for distilling is: 
 moisture, about 15%, 
 total nitrogen less than 2% (for  high starch content) 
 specific weight greater than 72kg/hl (also i ndicating high starch 
content). 
 
 
(c) Rye 
Rye ( Secale montanum) is a cereal that produces a good yield of grain in 
climates that experience short hot summers. 
Its starch content lies between that of barley and wheat, usually about 68% 
dwb.  
Its main use by distillers is to impart a distinct spicy flavour to the spirit. Rye is 
used in the production of some US whiskies; the Rye, Bourbon and 
Tennessee types.  
The distillers purchase specification is similar to that of wheat. 
 
(d) Barley 
Barley ( Hordeum polystichum) is a plant similar to wheat but is hardier, 
growing well in a cool temperate climate. Although its starch content is lower 
than that of maize and wheat, at about 65% dry weight, it is an important plant 
for distillers. It is normally germinated and dried to produce malted barley. 
Small amounts of unmalted barley are used for some whiskies, for instance 
Irish whiskey, for the purpose of flavour contribution. However, most of the 
barley for distilling is malted in order to generate a high enzyme level within 
the grains. 
 
 
4 Enzymes for GNS Production 
 
It is possible to break starch down completely to glucose using microbial 
enzymes. These starch-degrading enzymes are products of selected bacteria 
and fungi and are produced and sold by specialist enzyme companies. The 
enzymes are partially purified and sold to the food, drinks and detergent 
industries. There are usually at least two or three different enzymes in the 
mix. The individual enzymes will either have different actions on the starch or 
16 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
have different temperature or pH preferences. This allows them to cope with 
varied mashing conditions. 
 
The main enzyme used in all starch saccharification enzyme mixes is 
amyloglucosidase (sometimes called glucoamylase). This can break all links 
in the starch molecule given sufficient time. It releases glucose molecules. 
 
In enzyme preparations sold to distillers, there are usually two other enzymes 
that speed up the overall action: 
 Alpha-amylase is included to reduce the viscosity, speeding up the 
whole process and 
 enzymes that specifically break down branched chains in dextrins 
(called by various names: „debranching‟ enzymes, „pullulanase‟, „limit 
dextrinase‟) also speeds the process  and increase the fermentability 
of the extract 
 
The enzymes preparations sometime s contain enzymes that break down 
proteins (proteinases) and glucans (glucanases). These could have a 
significant effect in exposing the starch to attack by the saccharification 
enzymes. The result could be to speed the completion of the conversion of 
starch to sugar. 
 
Again, it is the combined effect that gives a good result, in this case the rapid 
and complete breakdown of starch to glucose. 
 
The companies that supply enzymes will work with the distiller to find the best 
mix of enzymes to use and to offer  advice on best way to use the mix. This 
often has to be found by trial and error. It depends on: 
 
 the type and quantity of starch to be broken down, 
 the prevailing pH and temperature at the point of use, 
 the equipment being used and 
 the time available  
 
 the type and quantity of starch to be broken down, 
 the prevailing pH and temperature at the point of use, 
 the equipment being used and 
 the time available 
5.  Yeast for Cereal Wort Fermentation 
 
Yeast takes in various sugars such as glucose and maltose for e nergy and 
growth. It can utilise such sugars in the presence or absence of oxygen. 
When oxygen and a small amount of sugar are available, the yeast takes in 
both and produces new cells. This mode of living is called aerobic growth. 
Little or no alcohol is produced. 
When no oxygen is available, yeast takes in sugars more quickly. In this mode 
of metabolism, known as fermentation, new cell production ceases.  Instead, 
the cells produce relatively large quantities of alcohol and carbon dioxide. 
17 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
Minor products include a range of substances called congeners which 
contribute to the flavour of whisky. 
Nearly all of the sugars formed from the  starch during mashing can be used 
by yeast. The wort also supplies the following nutritional requirements for 
yeast: 
 
 Nitrogenous compounds in the form of amino acids. These are 
created from the barley protein during malting and mashing. 
 Lipids or fatty material 
 Vitamins 
 Trace metals 
 Oxygen 
 
 
5.1.   Yeasts used in distilling 
 
There are two main types of yeast used in distilling: - 
 
(a) Cultured distilling yeast 
A number of strains of this type of yeast are in use in the industry. 
This type of yeast is produced specifically for the Scotch Whisky industry to 
provide: 
 optimum uptake of the sugars present in the wort 
 high alcohol yield and  
 nms having the desired organoleptic qualities. 
The yeast is encouraged to reproduce for a couple of generations at the start 
of the fermentation by providing the correct nutrients including oxygen. 
Growth is usually finished by the twelfth hour of  fermentation. This growth is 
required for an active healthy fermentation. 
Distilling yeast is supplied in the following forms: 
 as pressed yeast with a dry matter (DM) content of 24 to 30 %, 
 or in a liquid form, known as yeast cream, at about 18% DM or, 
 as dried yeast with a DM content of about 95%. 
At the end of a distillery fermentation, all of the yeast is sent to the still along 
with the fermented wash.  
 
(b) Brewers’ yeast. 
Brewers‟ yeast is yeast that has been grown in the early stage of the brewery 
fermentation. It may be a pure culture or may a mix of strains. Approximately 
two generations of growth occur. The yeast is separated from the beer and 
some is reused for further fermentations. The surplus is sold to food and 
savoury flavour producers and t o distilleries. Brewer‟s yeast strains are less 
efficient at converting sugars to alcohol than distillers yeast strains but can 
adapt more quickly to distillery worts and may contribute  to the flavour of the 
whisky 
Brewers use two kinds of yeast:  -Saccharomyces cerevisiae (ale yeast) and  
Saccharomyces carlsbergensis or uvarum (lager yeast).   
18 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
Commercial brewers‟ yeast sold to the distilling industry often contains both 
types. Brewers‟ yeast is usually sold in the pressed form at about 25% DM.   
 
Many distillers use mixed yeast strains, others just one strain, to achieve the 
yield and flavour characteristics they require. If only one type is used, then the 
strain must be of the distillery yeast type if a good alcohol yield is required. 
 
5.2. Yeast Storage and Pitching 
(a) Yeast storage 
Pressed yeast must be kept in the temperature range of 1 to 4 oC from the 
moment of packing until the moment of use, to minimise deterioration and the 
growth of unwanted bacteria (see later under “yeast quality and 
contamination”). Cold storage and refrigerated transport are necessary.  
Pressed distilling yeast can have a shelf life of up to six weeks, depending on 
the temperature in storage. Brewers‟ yeast is less stable. Dried yeast is 
packed hermetically in an inert atmosphere . It can be stored for up to two 
years at ambient temperature. 
(b) Yeast mixing and pitching. 
Pressed yeast can be resuspended in cold water in a small tank immediately 
before pitching. The resuspended yeast is pumped into the chilled wort as it is 
pumped to the washback. This facilitates a quick start to fermentation start 
and minimises bacterial competition. Alternatively, pressed yeast can be 
added over the side of the washback without prior resuspension. 
Yeast cream is pumped from its chilled storage ve ssel in the distillery directly 
into the chilled wort line.   
Dried yeast is sometimes pitched directly over the side of the washback into 
the wort first runnings. Sometimes it is rehydrated in warm water before 
pitching. 
Whatever method of pitching is chosen, there must be no delay in pitching the 
wort. This would allow lactobacilli to grow and resulting drop in pH could 
impair both secondary conversion and the yeast fermentation itself. 
 
 
 
 
6.  Milling 
 
Every type of distillery  usually has a cereal mill of one type or another. Milling 
is necessary to expose  the starch in  the cereal endosperm  to the actions of 
enzymes in the subsequent mash . The only exception to this process may be 
a grain distillery in which whole unmalted cereal is first cooked under pressure 
and the cereal grains burst open by the subsequent release of pressure. This 
explosive release liquefies the cooked cerea l which can then be converted to 
fermentable sugar (saccharification)  by bacterial or fungal  enzymes. In grain 
distilleries in which malt is used as the enzyme source then the malt has to be 
milled even when whole grain cooking is practiced.  In other grain distilleries 
19 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
the unmalted cereal may be milled prior to cooking and  milled    malt added 
post cooking. 
 These different milling practices  for both malt and grain distilling  are 
described in the following paragraphs.  
 
6.1 The Purpose of Milling and Mill Types 
 
The purpose of all milling is to prepare the malt, wheat and maize for mashing 
and subsequent starch conversion by mak ing the centre of the malt corn 
(endosperm) accessible to water soluble enzymes.  
Where a wort separation system like a mash tun or lauter tun is used, milling 
must crush the s tarch containing endosperm  into fine particles while 
preserving the husk so that  it can be utilised as an effective filter during 
separation. 
This process is illustrated below: 
 
   
Milling
Malt
Mill Rolls
Grist consisting of
Flour
Grits & 
Husk  
20 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
Malt is firstly screened before being transported to the mills so that unwanted 
material like straw, stones or dust are removed.  Destoning may be a separate 
operation in which larger stones are removed under gravity on inclined 
vibrating screens while finer malt dust and sands ar e sieved conventionally . 
Similarly, any metal objects which may have accidentally entered the malt or 
grain conveying systems a re removed by magnetic extractors prior to 
screening. These secondary operations are essential to prevent foreign 
objects entering the mill and causing explosive sparks in the mill. Although 
destoning and metal extraction systems are expensive to install a nd operate, 
they may provide pay back by reducing wear and tear so extending the 
working life of the mill. However the main reason for their installation is to 
ensure the  health and safety of operators by reducing the risk of dust 
explosion and by removing health damaging dust from the atmosphere. 
 
Distillery mills are designed to meet the requirements of different types of malt 
and inert cereals and the different mashing and mash separation systems that 
are in use. 
 
(a) Four roll mills  
 
Four-roll mills ar e the commonest mills  used for milling well -modified malts 
where the starch is readily accessible and a mash tun will be used for mash 
separation. Such mills give the distiller good control of the particle size 
needed for the type of mashing vessel the dis tillery posseses. The milled malt 
is called grist and consists of malt flour, grits and husk. 
 
Four roll mill with screens
Feed roll controls malt flow into 
the mill.
First pair of rolls crack the malt.
Separation screens send fine 
particles straight through and 
coarse particles to the second pair 
of rolls.
Second pair of rolls crush the 
coarse particles.  
 
(b) Six roll mills  
 
This type of mill is  often used for milling less modified malts where the starch 
needs to be finely ground and the husk protected because of the aggressive 
treatment that the mash receives during cooking and transfer to lauter tun. 
Malt conditioning with steam or water may be used prior to milling to help 
husk protection. 
21 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
Feed roll controls the malt flow
First pair of rolls crack the malt
                   Sieve sends flour straight                
                       through, grits to the third pair                                             
                             of rolls and coarse particles  
                             to the second pair of rolls.
          
                             Second pair of rolls crush 
                             the coarse particles.
Sieve sends husk straight through, grits to the 
third pair of rolls and flour straight through.
Third pair of rolls crush the grits.  
Six roll mill with screens
 
 
(c) Hammer mills  
 
In grain distilleries, it is not usually necess ary to preserve malt husks for 
filtration purposes and hammer mills are used to achieve a fine malt grind, 
maximising the availability of the malt enzymes for the conversion of the 
maize or wheat starch to sugars. The preferred particle size specification,  
assisted by screening as in the malt distilleries, could be < 4mm, most 
particles being at 2mm. 
Some distilleries use green malt, freshly produced malt that has not been 
stabilised by kilning. In this case, the milling is done in a wet hammer mill. 
Again, the objective of the milling is to expose the enzymes need to effect 
conversion. Milled green malt has the consistency of a thin porridge, no 
particles being greater than a quarter of a corn in size. Obviously, all green 
malt has to be kept as cool as pos sible and used as quickly as possible, for it 
would deteriorate rapidly in storage. 
 
Milling of maize and wheat before cooking is sometimes carried out, with the 
objective of helping the process of grain disintegration and getting water into 
the starch as quickly as possible. Again, hammer mills are typically be used. 
In this case, only a coarse grind is necessary. 
 
 
 6.2 Malt Grist Analyses 
 
The quality of the grist or crushed malt that leaves the mill has a major effect 
on subsequent performance in mash separation. 
If it is too coarse, the starch will remain protected and the enzymes will not be 
able to convert it into sugar. 
If it is too fine, wort separation will be slow because the filter bed will become 
choked. 
Grist quality can be judged by „eye‟ or by sieve analysis. 
22 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
To the eye, the grist should display large pieces of empty husk and small 
pieces of white grist and flour. 
A traditional sieve box or more modern mechanical six sieve apparatus is 
more objective and the ideal grist analysis for the malt and the mashhouse 
plant in use should be specified. 
Examples of typical grist analyses for mash tun, lauter tuns and modern mash 
filters are illustrated in the charts below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additionally a histogram using the same data, wh ich shows a comparison of 
these typical grist sieve analyses, is shown below: 

23 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
%
Mash
Tun.
Lauter
Tun.
Mash
Filter.
Comparison of Grist Sieve Fractions.
Fine Grits
Coarse grits
Husk
Flour
 
 
 
 
6.3 Milling Safety. 
 
Malt dust is hazardous, fine dust in the atmosphere is explosive and breathing 
in the dust can cause respiratory problems. 
Malt mills are  designed to p revent explosions and magnets may be fitted to 
collect any steel or iron debris that could cause a spark. Stone separators are 
also installed to prevent sparks and to protect the rolls from damage/wear. 
The modern mill and malt handling plant is fitted wit h explosion doors that 
would direct a blast safely outwards should an explosion occur.  
People working on the malt plant need to wear dust masks to avoid breathing 
in any dust. 
Safe systems of work (permits to enter confined spaces) are required for 
people entering malt silos. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
 
7. Mashing and Wort Preparation 
 
 
7.1  Mashing and Wort Clarification in Malt Whisky 
   Distilleries 
 
 The Principles and Purpose of Mashing 
Introduction - Preparation of wort from 100% malted barley - mashing 
 
This recipe is used around the world for making malt whiskies. Malt whiskies 
have a distinct  flavour that is due in part to the type of malt mashed . 
 
The conversion of starch to sugars  has already started during the malting 
process, following the breakdown of the cell walls and protein matrix 
surrounding the granules . This conversion was stopped by drying the grains. 
It is restarted by adding back the water but there is no point in doing this with 
whole grains because the distiller must extract from the mash 
 all of the partly solubilised starch, 
 all of the sugars already formed and, 
 all of the diastatic enzymes. 
 
This cannot be done efficiently unless the grain has been milled to make the 
starch, the sugars and the enzymes accessible by water  
 
 
 
  
 MILLING 
The malt is  
crushed 
Crushed malt  
is mixed with  
water to start  
the conversion  
conversionn process 
The starch is  
converted into  
sugar by the  
malt 
enzymes 
MASHING CONVER- 
SION  
 
25 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
 
 
Mashing requires the following equipment: 
 
1. A grist hopper from which to feed the grist in a controlled way to the 
mixer. 
2. A supply of water that can be fed to the mixer through a heat 
exchanger to achieve a precise temperature 
3. A grist/water mixer,  often a tube fitted with a screw, for instance a 
„Steels masher‟, that delivers the mix over the side of and into the 
mashing vessel and 
4. A mashing vessel. 
 
Mashing vessels of different designs are used for malt whisky production, but 
all of them have: 
 a set of blades or a rake to stir the mash in a controlled way and 
 a slotted base that sits just above the outlet. 
 
When the outlet valve is opened, the mash settles gently on the slotted base 
through which the liquid extract is withdrawn. The grain extract i s the 
unfermented mash; an alternative and much shorter name used in Scotland is 
„wort‟. It may be clear or slightly cloudy, depending on the type of mashing 
vessel in use and the manner in which it is operated. 
  
 
Clear Wort
Spent Grain
 
 
Mashing is carried out in the followin g way. The grist is mixed with water that 
is called the first water because more water will be used later in the process. 
This mixing of the first water and the grist is called „mashing -in‟. Mashing-in is 
a critical step because the water must be at a prec isely controlled 
temperature.  
 
The temperature of the mash in the mashing vessel must be: 
 
 warm enough to gelatinise the remaining malt starch, 
 cool enough to preserve the activity of the enzymes and 
 be near to the optimum temperature for the speed of act ion of the malt 
amylases. 
26 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
 
The temperature that is the best compromise between these three 
requirements is in the range 62 to 65ºC. Many distilleries use 64.0ºC. 
   
The mash is stirred occasionally and after a given time that could be between 
20 to 70 min utes after filling. During this time the malt enzymes, alpha -
amylase and beta -amylase, are  converting (saccharifying) the starch to 
maltose and maltotriose. After the allotted time has elapsed, the wort is 
withdrawn from the bottom of the vessel. 
 
This is called the strong wort because it contains a high percentage of sugar. 
It is pumped through a heat exchanger to cool it to the temperature that suits 
the yeast that is to be added. This is usually in the range of 15 to 25ºC.  
 
 
Hot wort in
Cold wort out  
 
From the heat exchanger, the wort is transferred directly to the fermentation 
vessel. As soon as there is about 50cm of depth of wort at the correct 
temperature in the vessel, the yeast is added because it is essential for 
fermentation to start very quickly. Unyeasted fresh wort b ecomes heavily 
infected with Lactobacilli in a matter of an hour of so. 
 
Meanwhile, back in the mashing vessel the bed of grain still contains some 
materials that the distiller needs: a little more sugar and more starch that can 
be converted to sugar by th e enzymes carried over into the fermentation 
vessel. So warmer second water is added (about 70 ºC), drained off, cooled 
and sent to the fermentation vessel. Then the hot third water (about 80 ºC) is 
used to wash any remaining sugar out of the grain. The thir d water is normally 
recycled to form at least part of the first water for the next mash. 
 
At the end of the mashing process, the fermentation vessel is full of wort that 
is already fermenting rapidly. The mashing vessel contains the grain debris  
(draff), mainly husk, material that contains very little sugar or starch. This is 
used as feed for cattle or is disposed of in another environmentally friendly 
way. 
 
The specific gravity of the wort depends on the amount of water added per 
tonne of malt, usually abo ut 10 tonnes. The specific gravity is usually within 
the range of 1.050 and 1.070 and the pH value about 5.2. Maltose and 
maltotriose are the main sugars in the wort, together with smaller amounts of 
glucose and maltotetraose. All of these sugars can be fermented by suitable  
27 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
yeast strains but at the end of mashing only about 72% of the extracted wort 
is fermentable .About 15% of the remaining starch fragments  called dextrins 
are converted in the fermenting wash.  This is called the „secondary 
conversion‟ w ithout which the alcohol yield would be  reduced by about 60 
litres of alcohol per tonne. 
 
 
The Process of Mashing 
 
The major objective of mashing and wort preparation is to extract all of the 
available carbohydrate from the raw materials and present it to the yeast in a 
fermentable form . A subsidiary but important objective is  to extract other 
materials: 
 that provide the yeast with nutrients leading to a successful 
fermentation and 
 other materials that will eventually contribute to the flavour of the 
new make spirit. 
. As mentioned above t he final portion of conversion that takes place in the 
early stages of fermentation is known as 'secondary conversion'  The extent of 
secondary conversion is also dependent on mashing conditions and  can 
determine the limit of alcohol yield.  
 
The conditions chosen by each distillery are therefore vital in obtaining: 
 
 optimal extraction of potentially fermentable carbohydrate , additional 
,yeast nutrients and  the full compliment of diastatic enzymes from the 
malt, and  
 optimal conversion of the carbohydrate to fermentable sugars. 
 
When present, protein -degrading enzymes (proteases) c an produce smaller 
molecules such as amino acids which have a beneficial effect on yeast growth 
early in fermentation. Malt does contain some prot ease and some additional 
amino acid is produced during mashing. However the bulk of the necessary 
amino acid is already in the malt and is produced during the malting process 
when the protein matrix surrouding the starch is being broken down.. 
 
‘Conversion’ or ‘saccharification’ are the terms used to describe the 
enzymic production of fermentable wort from starch. 
The diagrams below illustrate how malt enzymes attack the long chains of 
sugar units that make up the starch molecule and convert them into 
fermentable sugars.  
For ease of demonstration they actually show the effect of malt enzymes on a 
small fragment (dextrin) of  a starch molecule (the amylopectin branched 
form). In the intact molecule there is, on average, one “branch” chain to every 
“main” chain.  
Each chain is about 25 glucose units in length and in the intact molecule the 
“free”  reducing end demonstrated below is connected to another “main” chain 
resulting in a huge polymer of branched chains. 
[ NB. This same molecule could have originated from malt, wheat or maize. ] 
28 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
α-Amylase is very active during mashing. It attacks randomly in the chains  to 
produce a mixture of maltose (2 glucose units), maltotriose (3 glucose units) 
and a whole range of dextrins (from 4 to 20 units) like the one depicted above. 
 
β-Amylase is also v ery active during mashing. It works its way along chains 
from the branch ends (non-reducing) releasing maltose as it progresses.  
 
 
 
 
α-amylase 
 
α-amylase 
β-amylase 
 
β-amylase 
 
Maltase 
Branch Linkage 
Glucose Unit 
Glucose 
Reducing 
End 
Enzyme 
Action 
Point 
Main Chain 
Main Chain 
Branch Chain 
Branch 
Point 
Branch Linkage 
Linkage 
Glucose Unit 
Glucose 
Reducing 
End 
29 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
This small segment of the starch molecule has been broken down to the 
following molecules: - 
 two glucose (Maltase action), 
 two maltose,  
 one maltotriose, 
 one 8-glucose unit branched chain limit dextrin 
 
 
The amylases can only come within one or two units of the branch points so 
that the so called “limit dextrins”  surrounding each branch point wil l contain 
between 4 and 8 glucose units like the one depicted in the diagram . It is easy 
to calculate that if there are two branch points for every 50 glucose units then 
approximately 12% of the original molecule would remain as a limit dextrin.  
 
However, malt contains small amounts of  two secondary enzymes, limit 
dextrinase and alpha glucosidase (maltase) which have the effect of breaking 
down at least half of the residual limit dextrins in the fermenting wort. . In the 
model shown above the limit dextr in containing the branch linkage would be 
broken at the branch point by limit dextrinase to create two new linear 
dextrins, one with three units (maltotriose) and one with five. The 5 -unit 
molecule could then be broken by further action of the amylases to create one 
molecule of maltose and one of maltotriose. All of the new fragments would 
then be fermentable. 
 
 The maltase enzyme is shown breaking maltose into two units of glucose in 
the above diagram but it can also break down maltotriose and to a lesser 
extent maltotetraose (4 glucose units).  
Both of these minor enzymes are heat sensitive so most of their activity is lost 
during mashing. Nevertheless, they do make a n important contribution to the 
additional 15% of fermentability gained by secondary conversion.  
 
 
 [ NB In the presence of the exogenous enzymes (i.e. externally added), 
amyloglucosidase and pullulanase, the attack on the starch molecule is 
different, but this does not apply to malt whisky production.    ] 
 
 
The range of sugars produced durin g conversion determines the 
fermentability of the wort. If the enzyme attack is complete, the wort will be 
very fermentable. If the enzyme attack is incomplete, the wort will be only 
partially fermentable.  
Enzymes are very sensitive to the conditions that  they work in. They are 
affected by how much water is present, temperature and pH or mash acidity. 
They take time to work, so the length of time that is allowed for mash 
conversion will affect the degree of conversion. 
 
 
 
 
30 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
 
 
There are optimum conditions f or mashing and these are illustrated in the 
table below: 
 
 
Condition Low Optimum High 
Temperature. Low temperatures do not 
affect the enzymes much, 
but the starch must be 
gelatinised first. 
Gelatinisation temperature 
for malt starch is 60-65C. 
65C High temperatures 
inactivate enzymes, 
including α and ß 
amylases and limit 
dextrinase. 
The action of amylases 
is stopped at 
temperatures over 
70C. 
pH. Acidic conditions kill the 
enzymes. Enzyme action is 
stopped at pHs below 5.0 
5.4 High pHs slow enzyme 
action, but it does 
continue at pHs of 7 or 
above. 
Water. 
(Mash 
thickness) 
Enzymes are more sensitive 
to heat in a thin mash. 
There is a lower 
concentration of enzyme and 
starch in a thin mash.  
Between 2.5 
and 3.5 litres 
of water per 
kilogram of 
dry grist.  
Enzymes are less 
sensitive to heat in a 
thick mash. There is a 
higher concentration of 
enzyme and starch in a 
thick mash.  
Time. Enzymes take time to attack 
the starch. Conversion will 
be incomplete in less than 30 
minutes.  
30 minutes Conversion will be 
almost complete after 
30 minutes. A longer 
time will not increase 
the yield of sugar but 
may make it more 
fermentable, but not if 
the temperature is 
~65O C. 
 
 
Calculation of mash tun extract in a malt distillery 
  
The ratio of water to malt grist (i.e. the  concentration) used in a mash 
determines the  volume and the  subsequent  alcoholic strength of an all-malt 
wash. Calculations are  therefore required to ascertain how much of each 
component is needed to end up with the desired  volume and strength of  
wash.  
 
This equation involves using a Specific Gravity (SG) figure The SG of a 
solution, such as wort, is defined as „the weight of a solution divided by the 
weight of an equal volume of distilled water at the same temperature (both   
31 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
weights in air)‟ The temp erature is usually 20 0C. An example is 1.055, where  
1 ml. of water weighs 1 gram and 1ml of the solution weighs 1.055 grams. 
The SG as defined above is often expressed as a multiple of 1000 (i.e. on the 
basis that water‟s SG=1.000, would now be 1000). Whe n expressed in this 
manner it is often referred to as simply the „gravity‟, e.g. 1055 (or „Ten fifty 
five‟) 
The SG can also be written in the form (1000 x SG) – 1000 (in this case 55). 
The solution-in this case wort- is said to have 55 degrees of excess gr avity. In 
the equation that follows, the excess Original Gravity (OG) figure is 55. The 
OG is the SG at the beginning of fermentation, before any alcohol is 
produced. If the volume (litres) of wort and the weight of malt mashed (Kg) are 
known then the amou nt of extract (%)  in the wort can be calculated by 
measuring the OG: 
 
Soluble Extract (%)  = litres wort x excess Original Gravity 
     3,87 x kg malt mashed 
 
The example below now illustrates  the necessary calculation to estimate the 
quantity of malt required to achieve 50,000 litres of wash with an O.G. of 1060 
in a malt distillery using a malt with an extract of 77.5% as is: 
 
Kg malt mashed = 50,000 x 60/77.5x 3.87 = 10,000 = 10tonnes 
 
 
 
 
The Principles and Purpose of Wort Separation 
 
In some grain distilleries the entire mash, including residues from the wheat or 
maize and malt is carried forward to the fermenter (to achieve higher alcohol 
yields), but in some the wort is separated from the spent grains in a mash tun 
or on filters of various types.  
 
However, in every malt distillery, w ort is always separated from the spent 
malt grains. 
 
When conversion is complete, the mash will consist of a sugar solution called 
wort and the husks of the malted barley. The purpose of wort separation is to 
remove these husks and any other particles that are not wanted in the wort. 
The objectives of effective wort separation are the removal of unwanted 
material while at the same time extracting all the available wort.  Wort is 
separated from the spent malt grains in every  malt distillery since unwanted 
“grainy” flavours would be ectracted in the fermenting wash and the wash still. 
 
Effective wort separation means: 
 Maximising extract recovery. 
 Absence of particles in the wort. 
 Absence of starch in the wort. 
 
32 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
To achieve the se objectives, wort separation systems use some common 
principles: 
 Filtration using the husk as a fine filter supported by the slotted 
base in the case of a mash or lauter tun. 
 Control of wort flow to ensure wort clarity and maximise filtration 
efficiency. 
 Sparging with hot waters to extract the maximum amount of soluble 
extract (wort). 
 Spent grain (waste husk) removal and disposal on completion of 
filtration. 
 
There are many systems in which wort can be separated from the mash, the 
most common in the Scotch Whisky industry being: 
 The traditional mash tun. 
 The lauter mash tun. 
 the semi-lauter mash tun 
 the mash filter 
 
Unlike the brewing industry  where mash filtration is now quite a common 
practice, there is presently only one distillery in Scotland which ope rates a 
mash filter. The operation of different wort separation systems , including a 
mash filter,is illustrated in the diagrams below:  
 
N.B. All types of mash tun act both as a conversion vessel and as a wort 
separation vessel.  
 
(a) Mash Tun 
 
In a traditional mash tun, filtration through the deep bed gives bright wort, but 
it is relatively slow. 
 
Wort flow is controlled by adjusting the taps on the outlet main or by a 
manometric or (differential pressure controlling) device such as a balancing 
underback (see below).  
Strong wort (called the first water ) is run off slowly because it s high 
concentration and the mash bed must not settle on to the plates too quickly. 
When the first water is fully drained, a second water at a higher temperature is 
added through the mashing machine at a temperature of 75 -770C and mixed 
into the drained mash. This second water is again allowed to drain off, before 
a final, third water is added at 77 – 870C and again mixed with the rotating 
paddles.  
This final water or “sparge” i s not cooled and pumped to the wash -back but is 
retained as mashing water for the next mash. 
 
When all the wort has been run off, spent grain is removed through a port in 
the base either manually or by discharge gear rotating arms. 
33 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
Sparge water 
supply to rotating 
sprinkler.
Wort flow control.
Deep bed of mash 
which 'floats' above 
the plates. 
Spent 
grain 
out.
Mash tun
Slotted 
plates 
through 
which the 
wort is 
filtered.
 
 
  
Such deep bed mash -tuns with traditional paddle mixers are now  very rare 
because the majority of Scotch whisky distilleries firstly converted their mash 
tuns to a “semi -lautering” system by installing rotating sparge arms as shown 
below  
.  
The traditional mash tun is a simple but effective system involving only one 
vessel for both the mash conversion and wort separation processes. It gives 
good quality wort but has a slow turn round time and is less efficient for 
extracting and transferring the enzymes, which are required to continue their 
activities in the washback. 
 
The underback is a vessel through which the wort flows and it is used to 
control its run-off rate. It is important that the malt bed is not pulled down on to 
the mash tun plates, when it would impair drainage. Most malt distilleries are 
equipped with a balanced underback, in which the wort level in the mash tun 
and underback are equalised, allowing close control of the run-off rate. 
 
(b) Semi - Lauter and  Lauter Tun 
 
 
The first semi lauter mash tuns were run essentially in the same manner as 
the traditional mash tun, but  instead of adding and mixing separate waters 
and fitering to almost dryness, sparge (hot water) is sprayed gently over the 
grain, usually in two or three batches (waters) in much the same way as a true 
lauter. This system was an interim technology whereby a traditional mash tun 
was fitted with a rotating sparge arm or with sparge rings instead of adding 
separate waters through the Steeles masher and mixing with rotating paddles.  
The first and second waters are then pumped to the fermentation vessel  
34 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
(washback) and any subsequent water is returned to the sparge tank for use 
in the next mash. 
 
A true lauter tun is depicted below with a much shallower bed , proper lauter 
knives and rotating sparge arm or sparge rings.  
 
Sparge water 
supply to sprinkler.
Wort flow control.
Lauter tun
Slotted 
plates 
through 
which the 
wort is 
filtered.
Spent 
grain 
out.
Shallow bed of 
mash. 
Rakes to hasten filtration
Raking gear drive
 
 
 
Because the mash is added directly to the lauter via the mashing machine 
and not to a separate mash  conversion vessel these lauter tuns are  
sometimes also  referred to as “semi -lauters” In a lauter tun, filtration gives 
bright wort through a shallow bed; often the first runnings of cloudy wort are 
recirculated, a process known by the German term vorlauf. In this system  
sparging is continuous while the shallow mash -bed is raked by the slowly 
rotating lautering knives. The sparge tem peratures are ramped up at suitable 
time intervals to mimic the old three water system. However the extraction is 
much more efficient and higher working gravities can be achieved. 
 
Wort flow is controlled by taps on the outlet main, by a manometric 
(differential pressure controlling) device such as a balancing underback or by 
automated flow control valves. Strong wort is run off just as described above 
for the mash tun. Rakes are used to reduce bed compaction in order to 
increase wort flow if it has slowed down. This affects filtration performance 
and can cause the wort to go cloudy for a significant period  but such c loudy 
wort is still transferred to the washback. 
 
Sparge is sprayed over the grain bed  as shown above  and the last high 
temperature sparge is retained, as in the traditional method, for subsequent 
The shorter run-off times of lauter tuns are beneficial to the enzymes, helping 
preserve their activity for use in the washback. 
 
35 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
Spent grain is removed through a port in the base by discharge gear att ached 
to the rakes.  
 
  
(c) Mash Filter.  
 
A Plate and Frame type of filter can be used to obtain wort in distilleries. The 
mash filter‟s numerous small bed depths rather than a single deeper bed 
enables a very fast run-off of wort and effective sparging.  
The filter is constructed of alternate frames to hold the mash and plates to 
channel wort run -off and sparging, all separated by filter cloths which hang 
over the plates: - 
 
Plate Cloth Mash
frame
 
 
 
The operating principles of the mash filter are explained below: 
 
Classical mash filter 
The operating principles of the classical mash filter are explained below: 
 
1. The filter is first flushed with hot water before the converted mash from the 
mashing vessel is transferred into the mash frames through the top central 
channel. This channel bypasses the plates. 
 
Mash filling
 
36 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
 
2.  When the filter is full, wort drains from the mash into the plate on one side 
of the frame (the wort plate) and down into the wort channel. 
 
Wort run-off
 
 
Wort is run from the wort channel into a buffer tank and from there into the 
boiling copper/kettle. 
 
3. Sparging, to wash out all the wort from the mash is achieved by pumping 
water into the plate on the other side of the frame (the sparge plate), 
across the mash bed and then through wort channel. 
 
Sparging
 
 
 
5. The spent grain is droppe d from the filter at the end of the cycle when 
the filter is opened. 
 
 
 
 
Modern mash filter 
The modern thin -bed mash filter operates on the same principle but it has 
several important refinements as can be seen in the diagram below: - 
 
37 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
 
Filter cloth
Membrane
Plate
Frame
 
 
 
 The mash frame s are fitted with an expandable membrane, which is 
inflated in order to squeeze the mash beds gently and improve yield 
(extract). This also gives a much drier spent grain cake with a lower effluent 
loading. 
 
 The filter is filled from the bottom channel, wh ich reduces mash aeration 
and fills the chambers homogeneously. 
 
 The filters have polypropylene plates as opposed to the cast iron or 
stainless steel of the classical filter, making them lighter and easier to 
handle. 
 
The operating principles of the modern mash filter are explained below: 
 
1. The filter is filled from the underside: - 
 
Mash in
Air out
 
 
2. Wort is filtered through the grain bed supported by the cloths: - 
 
Wort out
Wort out
 
38 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
 
3. The grain bed is compressed to extract the maximum amount of strong 
wort (wort is still being filtered at this stage): - 
 
Air pressure
 
 
 
 
4. Sparge is run in through the mash infilling system (wort is still being filtered 
at this stage): - 
Sparge in
Sparge in
 
 
5.  The grain bed is compressed again to extract all the weak wort. 
 
6. The spent grain is dropped from the filter at the end o f the cycle when the 
filter is opened. 
 
 
The mash filter is being developed and improvements are being made all the 
time. The latest plant gives good quality wort; excellent extract recovery and a 
fast turn round time. 
39 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
(d) Spent Grain Discharge. 
 
The was te husk after the wort has been removed is a valuable co -product 
because it can be utilised as cattle food.  Often referred to as draff, the  spent 
husks are discharged from the mash -tun or lauter by the paddles or rakes 
sweeping the draff roud and dropping  it down through a port in the false 
bottom. It is then conveyed mechanically or pneumatically to a draff hopper 
from whence it can be transported directly to local farms as a direct cattle feed 
or to a “dark grains “ plant where it is died and processed a long with pot -ale 
from the distillery.(see later) 
 
 
Prevention of Microbial Contamination. 
 
Because wort contains a high percentage of sugar, it is cooled and transferred 
rapidly to fermentation vessel in order to prevent any microbial contamination 
from adversely affecting fermentation before yeast can start to grow. 
It is pumped through a heat exchanger to cool it to the temperature that suits 
the yeast that is to be added. This is usually in the range of 15 to 25ºC.  
From the heat exchanger the wort is t ransferred directly to the fermentation 
vessel. 
 
Hot wort in
Cold wort out  
 
As soon as there is about 50cm of depth of wort at the correct temperature in 
the vessel, the yeast is added because it is essential for fermentation to start 
very quickly. Unyeasted fresh wort becomes he avily infected with Lactobacilli 
in a matter of an hour of so. 
 
Preservation of Enzyme Activity in Wort. 
 
A significant amount of starch remains to be converted to sugar in the early 
stages of fermentation. This is called the „secondary conversion‟ without  
which the alcohol yield would be about 15% lower. 
 
Unlike brewing, distillery wort is not boiled prior to fermentation in order to 
preserve the enzyme activities to carry out this secondary conversion.  
 
Keeping sparge temperatures lower is also important here. 
 
The shorter run-off times of lauter tuns are beneficial to the enzymes, helping 
preserve their activity for use in the washback. 
Similarly, the modern mash filters not only give good quality wort, with 
excellent extract recovery, but the fast turn round time also helps preserve 
enzyme activities. 
40 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
Wort Properties. 
 
The specific gravity of the wort depends on the amount of water added per 
tonne of malt, usually about 10 tonnes. The specific gravity is usually within 
the range of 1.050 and 1.070 and the pH value about 5.2. 
  
Maltose and maltotriose are the main sugars in the wort, together with smaller 
amounts of glucose and maltotetraose. All of these sugars can be fermented 
by suitable yeast strains. 
 
Nearly all of the sugars formed from the barley s tarch during mashing can be 
used by yeast.  
The wort also supplies the following nutritional requirements for yeast: 
 
 Nitrogenous compounds in the form of amino acids. These are 
created from the barley protein during malting and mashing. 
 Lipids or fatty material 
 Vitamins 
 Trace metals 
 Oxygen 
 
 
41 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
 7.2  Cereal Cooking and Mashing for Grain Whisky/ GNS 
The Purpose and Process of Cereal Cooking 
Preparation of wort from unmalted source of starch(80-85%) and (10- 
15%) malted barley 
 
In this type of mash bill, the s accharification enzymes come from malted 
barley. Therefore the process is similar to that described for the 100% malt 
mash (in 16.2A), particularly as regards the temperature at which the 
conversion takes place. 
 
The main difference is that most of the sta rch to be saccharified comes from 
unmalted grain, often maize and wheat. As described above, the starch 
granules in malted barley are partly broken down in the malting process, they 
gelatinise at a relatively low temperature of about 64 ºC. Starch granules in 
maize and wheat on the other hand gelatinise at higher temperatures , can be 
heavily encased in protein, and are enclosed in undegraded cell walls.so  
require cooking. 
 
(a) Cereal cooking process 
 
The purpose of cooking is to gelatinise the starch granules i n cereals that are 
not malted. Maize and wheat are the main unmalted cereals used by distillers. 
 
Gelatinised starch is accessible for saccharification by enzymes, but 
ungelatinised starch is not. The gelatinisation is achieved by cooking the 
grains. Many different methods of cooking are used.  
The following is one example that illustrates the basic principles of most 
cooking methods: 
 
 Grain, for instance maize, is mixed with warm water in a slurry vessel, 
using about two and a half tonnes of water per tonne of grain. 
 When this is well mixed, it is transferred to a pressure vessel fitted with 
a stirrer to gently mix the grain as it is cooking. 
 Steam is injected into the cooker to raise the pressure above that of the 
atmosphere to achieve a temperature of 130ºC. 
 This temperature is held for 5 minutes and the steam supply is cut off. 
 Then the vessel is opened in a carefully regula ted way to remove the 
contents; this is called blowdown. 
 Finally, the cooked cereal is cooled to below 70 ºC as quickly as 
possible. 
 
Variations to this process include: 
 hammer milling the grain to a flour to help mixing and 
gelatinisation and 
 the addition of backset (stillage from the beer column of the 
continuous still) to the water, reducing the water usage rate. 
42 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
The combination of t he cooking and sudden release of pressure ensures that 
the starch in the maize is completely gelatinised and in perfect condition for 
the saccharification enzymes. 
 
 
(b) Mashing and Mash Conversion (Saccharification) by Malt 
 
If malted barley is being used as a source of enzymes to convert the 
gelatinised starch to sugars. it also provides its share of the total starch 
needed. As in 100% malt whisky production, the malt must be milled to 
expose the enzymes and allow them to disperse in the liquid of the mash. 
 
In contrast to the use of malted barley in malt whisky production, relatively 
intact husks are not necessary; either the wort is filtered on a series of sieves 
or it is pumped to the fermentation vessel without any filtration. Therefore, the 
malt is ground to fine flour in a hammer mill for ease of mixing into the rest of 
the mash. 
 
The required quantity of malt is added to the cooled maize mash at a 
temperature of about 64ºC. This is often done in the fermentation vessel itself. 
As soon as the vessel has r eceived the correct amount of mash, the 
temperature is reduced to that required for the start of fermentation (15 to 
25ºC) and the yeast is added immediately. 
 
The specific gravity of the wort usually lies within the range 1.060 to 1.080 
and the pH value i n the region of 5.5 to 5.8. Maltose and maltotriose are the 
main sugars in the wort, together with smaller amounts of glucose and 
maltotetraose. All of these sugars can be fermented by suitable yeast strains. 
 
A significant amount of starch remains to be c onverted to sugar in the early 
stages of fermentation. Without this secondary conversion, the alcohol yield 
would be about 15% lower. 
 
Preparation of wort from 100% unmalted source of starch and microbial 
enzymes 
 
Microbial enzymes have at least three adva ntages over malt enzymes for the 
distiller: 
 they give more alcohol yield per tonne of grain, the yield is between 4 
and 10% higher, 
 they avoid the processing involved in the use of malt, 
 the enzyme preparation may be more tolerant of different pH and 
temperature than the malt enzymes. 
43 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
 
The unmalted cereal, usually maize or wheat  which are relatively cheap 
compared to malt,  is cooked and cooled as described above and the 
enzymes are added. This can be done in the fermentation vessel. 
 
The conditions under which to add the enzymes are very important. There will 
be an optimal set of conditions, those that give the best result, the highest 
alcohol yield. 
 
The optimal conditions may be those recommended by the manufacturer. 
Alternatively, the conditions might be those devised empirically (the method of 
trial and error) by the distiller.  However the optimal conditions when found, 
they must be employed exactly for every mash, because deviations are likely 
to lead to loss of yield. The yeast is added to the wort as soon as possible. 
 
The specific gravity of the wort is usually in the range 1.060 to 1.080 and the 
pH value about 5.8. Glucose is the only sugar present in the wort. 
Only a small amount of starch remains to be converted to sugar in the early 
stages of fermentation, so „secondary conversion‟ is not as important as it is in 
malt saccharified mashes. 
 
 (a) The Purpose and Process of Cereal Cooking  for  enzymic 
conversion. 
 
. The purpose for cooking is the same as above (malt conversion 16.2B.1.1.) 
 
(i) Batch cooking 
 
Cooking is carried out in pressure vessels that are equipped with stirrers in 
order to prevent the grain from settling and cooking unevenly. Cookers vary in 
load capacity from about 2 tonnes to about 20 tonnes. Whole or milled grain is 
added to the vessel with the appropriate amount of water.  
In some distilleries, backset (spent wash) may be added along with the fresh 
water.  
 
Steam is then injected into the vessel to flush out all air at which point the 
vessel vents are closed and the steam injection  continued until the desired 
pressure is attained. The steam used for direct injection must be “pure water” 
steam. 
 
Three factors determine the effectiveness of cooking: 
 
 the pressure and temperature reached (these are directly linked), 
 the duration of the elevated pressure conditions and  
 the solid/liquid ratio in the cooking vessel. 
 
 
44 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
Cooking conditions vary widely between grain distilleries. The following table 
compares a low pressure, short duration cook with a high-pressure cook. 
 
 LOW 
TEMPERATURE 
HIGH 
TEMPERATURE 
Time to reach hold temp.(mins)                     80 40 
Maximum temp.(oC)                                                                        103 150 
Hold pressure (psig)                                                                           15 68 
Hold time (mins)                                               0 30 
 
 
(ii) Continuous Cooking 
 
Continuous cooking equipment is more complex in construction and more 
difficult to control and to clean than batch cooking plant.  
This is at least partly due to the need to maintain „steady -state‟ to achieve the 
required cook without overcooking and energy waste.  
 
Factors common to the various types of continuous system are: 
 
 fine ground cereal, e.g. wheat through a hammer mill, to aid quick 
cooking, 
 addition of a small amount of malt, the „pre -malt‟, to reduce the 
viscosity of the slurry (action of alpha -amylase converting the large 
starch molecules into the smaller dextrins); in gns production microbial 
alpha-amylase is used. 
 grain slurry pumped through a relatively narrow tube,   
 control of residence time,  
 use of high pressure and temperature which can be higher than those 
economically achievable in batch cooking  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
Cooling after Cooking 
 
At the planned time, the contents of the cooking v essel are blown by the 
internal pressure of the vessel to the mash tun, or holding (conversion) 
vessel, or to the washback.  
 
Temperature control is vital, each distillery having a target final mash 
temperature. This is often about 63oC.   
 
However, throughput constraints or other operational factors could require a 
quite different cooling regime with the cooked material being added directly to 
the washback with the malt slurry. 
 
Cooling of the cooked grain can be achieved in a variety of ways:  
 by drawing a vacuum in the cooker, 
 by using flash/vacuum vessels, 
 in a heat exchanger between the cooker and the mash tun, 
 or by simultaneous addition of cold water to the mash tun at blow 
down.  
 
It is possible to supplement the cold water with backset, which is aci dic and 
can help accelerate the breakdown of cereals in the cooker. The malt grist 
can be added to either the cooker or the mash tun as long as the temperature 
is appropriate. 
 
In summary, the procedures for cooling the cooked grain and the sequence of 
the transfer to the washback can differ widely in different distilleries.  
All distilleries have the objective of achieving their desired throughput and 
their target conversion temperature from the first moment when the malt 
meets the grain.  
 
 
The Use of Exogenous Enzymes  
 
In the production of Scotch Whisky, only endogenous enzymes are allowed. 
This means that the only enzymes permitted are those present in the raw 
materials, which in practice means the malt and yeast.   
 
Exogenous enzymes are permitted in t he production of GNS. They are used 
in the conversion of starch to sugars in mashing and can, if desired, totally 
replace the use of malt. These enzymes are extracted from microbial sources 
(bacteria & fungi) by specialist enzyme companies. They are sold a s purified 
preparations of specific type and power of activity and recommended 
conditions of use. 
 
46 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
(a) Selection and conditions of use 
 
All enzyme preparations have to be selected carefully and targeted at the 
requirement of each individual distillery.  
Enzyme supplying companies offer advice on the conditions of use as defined 
by four criteria: 
 the type and quantity of starch to be broken down,  
 the prevailing pH and temperature at the point of use, 
 the equipment being used  and  
 the time available. 
 
The t ypes that are used in GNS production for starch breakdown are α -
amylase and amyloglucosidase (sometimes called glucoamylase). In some 
cases, pullulanase and protease might also be used.  
These enzymes can accomplish an almost complete conversion of starch to 
fermentable sugar.  
Thus, the yield of alcohol in GNS production is potentially higher than that in 
Scotch Whisky production. 
(b) alpha-Amylase 
 
This enzyme breaks the starch molecule into smaller units, called branched 
maltodextrins and oligosaccharide s, but produces some maltose and 
maltotriose. Important physical effects of this enzyme are increased 
liquefaction and a reduction of the viscosity of a starch suspension. Microbial 
α-amylase preparations act in a similar manner to the malt enzyme 
chemically. However, they are can work at higher temperature and lower pH 
than the malt enzymes.  
(c) Amyloglucosidase (glucoamylase) 
 
Amyloglucosidase is a saccharification enzyme, that is to say it can convert 
nearly all of the maltodextrins to glucose. It breaks down α1 -4 bonds of the 
linear parts of the starch molecule quickly and α 1 -6 bonds of the branched 
parts slowly. This is an advantage over the malt enzymes, which cannot break 
the α 1 -6 bonds. Again, the commercial preparations are very stable in 
relatively extreme conditions such as high temperature. 
47 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
(d) Pullulanase (debranching enzyme or limit dextrinase in malt) 
 
This enzyme is specific for the breakdown of α 1 -6 bonds. It is al so known as 
debranching enzyme because the α 1 -6 bonds are the branch points of some 
of the starch molecules. It would be used in combination with 
amyloglucosidase. 
(e) Protease 
 
In wheat, the starch granules are encased in a protein matrix. Proteases can 
be used to hydrolyse the protein. This exposes the starch granules and 
improves the effectiveness of the alpha -amylase. Proteases in use include: 
neutral protease of microbial origin; the plant enzyme, papain and a „side‟ 
activity of some preparations of amyloglucosidase.   
 
(f) ‘Side’ activities 
When enzymes are extracted from biological material, it is usual for more than 
one type of enzyme to be present. The subsequent partial purification of the 
target enzyme is designed to remove unwanted enzymes and t o concentrate 
the one needed. However, one or more of the minor enzyme constituents 
might be of use in the final application. An example is the possible presence 
of protease and/or β-glucanase in amyloglucosidase. 
 
 
48 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
8.   Wort Cooling and Aeration 
 
(a) Wort Cooling. 
 
The wort must be cooled prior to yeast being added. The optimum 
temperature for the start of fermentation, depending on the yeast strain, will 
be between15 to 25ºC.  
 
Although in the past, vertical open coolers were common, today the plate heat 
exchanger is almost universally used. This is because:- 
 
 Plate heat exchangers are very efficient and can cool the wort down in a 
short time. There is a large plate surface area for wort/coolant and the 
liquids‟ flow across the surface is very fast 
 Nearly all the heat from the wort can be recovered to generate a hot water 
supply for brewing and other production uses. 
 They are enclosed and are easy to clean in line. Therefore they keep the 
wort sterile. 
 
The principles of how the plate heat exchanger works are illustrated in the 
diagrams below:-   
 
  
Plate heat exchanger
Hot wort in
Hot water out
Cold wort out
Cold water in
Plates  
 
 
Cold 
water in
Cold wort out
Hot wort in
Hot water out  
 
 
The wort that leaves the cooling system is now ready for the next stage of 
fermentation.  
 
49 
GCD – Elective A, Cereal Section 16: Raw Materials Processing 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (GCD Revision Notes Version 1 September 2009) 
It should have the following characteristics:- 
 
 The required mixture of sugars, most of which will ferment into alcohol  
 It should contain soluble protein. Barley protein will have been broken down 
into soluble form, for example into amino acids. Soluble protein is required 
in the wort because it provides food for the yeast. 
 A temperature that suits the yeast and encourages a start to fermentation. 
 Absence of any spoilage micro-organisms. 
 Traces of materials like calcium and zinc which are essential for healthy 
yeast growth.  
 Other nutrients that will encourage yeast growth, for example oxygen. 
 
 
 
(b) Wort Oxygenation / Aeration. 
 
Yeast needs oxygen to encourage growth and the wort cooling stage is the 
ideal time for aeration. 
 
It is usual to inject air or sometimes oxygen into the wort stream and as the 
amount of dissolved oxygen in the wort affects yeast growth so much, some 
form of control is required to guarantee consistency. The control may be by an 
air flow meter backed up by dissolved oxygen (DO2 ) measurement. 
 
Aeration can take place before or after cooling. The advantages and 
disadvantages of either choice are listed in the table below:- 
 
 
 
System Advantages Disadvantages 
Hot wort aeration Air is sterilised by the hot 
wort. 
Air is dissolved effectively as 
it passes through the cooler. 
Wort colour increase. 
Flavour change.  
Cold wort aeration No effect on wort quality. Need to provide sterile air. 
Need to assist air solubility by 
injecting small bubbles or 
ensuring vigorous mixing.  
 
 
 