1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Introduction & Reading List  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 1A: Raw Materials & Preparation 
of Cereal Wort 
 
Introduction and Reading List  
 
Introduction  
 
All potable spirits made from cereals can be split into three broad categories 
according to the grist bill and the source of starc h degrading  enzymes as 
follows: 
 
•  All malt  
•  Unmalted cereal plus malted barley  
•  Unmalted cereals saccharified by extraneous enzyme s 
 
The first two types are obviously dependant on malt ed barley as the source of 
enzymes as well as contributing to all or part of the fermentable extract.  
 
Module 1A therefore focuses on barley as the most i mportant cereal in distilling 
but the sections on 
 
•  Grain structure and  morphology 
•  Plant growth and development 
•  Agronomics  
•  Harvesting and storage  
•  Plant breeding 
 
are fairly similar for all the other cereals used a s the principal source of 
fermentable extract.  
 
For example, all cereal seeds have 
 
•  An embryo from which a new cereal plant can be gen erated 
•  A starch containing endosperm which can act as a f ood reserve for the  
          developing embryo  
•  An aleurone layer of cells  which can synthesise a nd release hydrolytic  
          enzymes into the endosperm to modify its contents into plant metabolites 
•  A seed coat to protect the seed from infestation a nd infection. 
 
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Introduction & Reading List  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
The exception to this generalization is dormancy, w ater sensitivity and 
germination energy/capacity in post harvest barley intended for malting. There 
can often be germination problems in cool, northern  hemisphere barley so there 
is extensive coverage on these topics.  
 
The subsequent units on barley then specifically consider 
 
•  The evaluation and selection of barley for malting  (including development of  
           new varieties) 
•  Barley intake and preparation for malting 
•  The malting processes  for malt for malt distillin g and for high diastase malt for  
           grain distilling 
 
The next two short sections then specify the different requirements for  
 
•  Evaluation and selection of cereals for grain dist illing and neutral spirit  
          production. 
•  Sources and selection of enzymes used as an altern ative to malt diastase 
 
The final sections in this module describe the processing and extraction of  
 
•  All malt mashes 
•  Mashes of cooked cereal and malt 
•  Cooked cereals converted with extraneous enzymes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Introduction & Reading List  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Essential Further Reading for Module 1A  
 
Barley Grain Physiology, Cultivation, Harvesting and Storage & Plant Breeding  
 
Briggs et al. in “Malting and Brewing Science”, Vol. 1 Malt and Sweet Wort , Chapman 
& Hall, 1981, Chapters 2-3. 
Bathgate & Cook, in “The Science & Technology of Wh iskies”, Piggot et al. eds, 
Longman Scientific & Technical, 1989, Chapter 2. 
Lockhart in “Cereal Science & Technology”, Palmer e d., Aberdeen University Press, 
1989, Chapter 1. 
Sage in “Cereal Science & Technology”, Palmer ed., Aberdeen University Press, 
1989, Chapter 2. 
 
Barley Intake, Preparation, Malting & Mashing  
 
Briggs et al. in “Malting and Brewing Science”, Vol. 1 Malt and Sweet Wort , Chapman 
& Hall, 1981 
Chapters 4 -6. 
Bathgate & Cook, in “The Science & Technology of Wh iskies”, Piggot et al. eds., 
Longman Scientific & Technical, 1989, Chapter 2. 
Bathgate in “Cereal Science & Technology”, Palmer e d., Aberdeen University Press, 
1989, Chapter 4. 
Dolan in “Whisky Technology, Production and Marketi ng”, Academic Press, Russell 
ed., 2003, Chapter 2. 
 
 
Cereals for Grain Distilling, Non-Indigenous Enzyme s, Cooking and 
Mashing  
 
Bronsky & Schumann in “The Science & Technology of Whiskies”, Piggot et al. eds., 
Longman Scientific & Technical, 1989, Chapter 1. 
Wilkin in “The Science & Technology of Whiskies”, P iggot et al. eds., Longman 
Scientific & Technical, 1989, Chapter 3. 
Bringhurst et al. in “Whisky Technology, Production  and Marketing”, Academic Press, 
Russell ed., 2003, Chapter 3. 
 
Water  
 
Dolan in “Whisky Technology, Production and Marketi ng”, Academic Press, Russell 
ed., 2003, Chapter 2 
Bathgate in “Brewing Room Book 1998 - 2000”, Lloyd ed., Pauls Malt Ltd, pp 81 – 
84. 
 
Analysis  
 
Hardy & Brown in “The Science & Technology of Whisk ies”, Piggot et al. eds., 
Longman Scientific & Technical, 1989, Chapter 7 
Aylott in “Whisky Technology, Production and Market ing”, Academic Press, Russell 
ed., 2003, Chapter 9. 
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Introduction & Reading List  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 