1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.1. Properties of Yeast 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010) 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation  & 
Maturation 
 
Unit 2.1 – Properties of Yeast  
 
 
Introduction 
 
Fungi are non-photosynthetic plants and yeasts are commonly defined as unicellular 
fungi which reproduce by budding, although there so me exceptions.  A few genera, of 
which Schizosaccharomyces  is the most important to the fermentation industri es, grow 
by binary fission, but they are regarded as yeasts rather than large bacteria because of 
their fungal structure and metabolism.  Many yeasts  grow in a multicellular form under 
certain cultural conditions, but usually as a “pseu domycelium” of individual oval cells.  
Only a few yeasts, often referred to as yeast-like fungi, grow primarily or exclusively as 
true mycelium of branching septate hyphae; but sinc e none are involved in fermentation 
processes they will not be discussed here.  Althoug h alcoholic fermentation is popularly 
regarded as a characteristic of yeasts, only about half of the known genera of yeast are 
capable of anaerobic fermentation.  The others are strict aerobes, obtaining energy by 
oxidative metabolism, usually of sugars.  There are  no yeast equivalents of anaerobic 
bacteria; and in fact the fermentative yeasts are n ot true facultative anaerobes since 
they are normally unable to grow under anaerobic co nditions for more than 2 – 3 
generations at most.  The commonest yeast of alcoho lic fermentations is 
Saccharomyces (Latin: sugar fungus)  cerevisiae   (Latin: of beer) but other species or 
genera are involved instead in specific local beverages in various parts of the world, and 
many different fermentative yeasts could take part in naturally inoculated fermentations 
of cider, rum or wine.. 
 
 
 
Principal organelles of the yeast cell 
 
Figure 1 shows an electron micrograph of a cell of aerobically grown S. cerevisiae , i.e. in 
the state in which distilling yeast would be received as cake or cream.   
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.1. Properties of Yeast 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010) 
   
Figure 2.1.1:  Aerobically-grown Saccharomyces cerevisiae .   
Short diameter of cell = approx.  4 µm.  N = nucleu s, V = vacuole, Mt = mitochondrion, 
ER = endoplasmic reticulum 
 
 
The principal organelles of the yeast cell are as follows: 
 
The cell wall , a rigid structure with its structural strength co nferred by fibrous β1-6 
glucan with β1 -3 side chains.  An outer amorphous mannan  layer  consists of α1-4  
linked mannose units with α1-2, and  α1-3 side chains.  Even within S. cerevisiae  there 
is some variation in exact composition, and other polymers may occur in the cell walls of 
other yeast genera.  The cell wall also contains protein, which is mainly accounted for by 
wall-bound enzymes.  Bud scars are mainly composed of a form of chitin, a polymer of 
n-acetyl glucosamine.  The wall is porous to nutrie nts and metabolites but larger 
polymers are blocked. 
  
The plasma membrane  (or cell membrane, cytoplasmic membrane ) lies immediately 
below the cell wall.  Structurally it is mainly a b i-layer of phospholipid interspersed with 
enzyme protein and sterol.  These enzymes (permease s) control the entry of nutrients 
and release of metabolic products.  There are three  mechanisms of transport of 
molecules across the cell membrane: (a) simple diff usion, very rare and limited to a few 
low-MW compounds e.g. ethanol and CO 2, (b) facilitated diffusion powered by the 
concentration gradient across the membrane but requ iring enzymic assistance, and (c) 
active transport requiring expenditure of energy by  the yeast in addition to the specific 
enzyme.  Since many fermentative yeasts are associa ted with the high sugar 
environment provided by fruits, these sugars would then enter the cell by facilitated 
diffusion.   
   
Cytoplasm  is the living material of the cell, the site of al l of the inter-related enzymic 
activities which constitute life. The cytoplasm inc ludes various different types of 
organelle of which the most important are the nucleus, nitochondriia and vacuole .   
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.1. Properties of Yeast 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010) 
The nucleus, containing the genetic information of the DNA chromosomes, controls the 
hereditary properties of the cell, and also the seq uence of cell activities, especially 
budding or sporulation.  Figure 1 shows the charact eristic appearance of several 
mitochondria, with their highly folded inner membra ne.  Mitochondria are particularly 
associated with aerobic growth, being the site of t he various enzymes of oxidative 
metabolism.  Mitochondria are not observed in anaer obically grown cells, but it is now 
known that they have not disappeared, they have sim ply lost their aerobic folded 
appearance and persist in a degenerate form until r eactivated by aerobic conditions.  
Mitochondria have their own genetic system and, alt hough this is a simplification of the 
true situation, can be regarded as parasitic bacter ia within the yeast cytoplasm.  Failure 
of mitochondrial reproduction makes the yeast “resp iratory deficient”: unable to carry out 
oxidative metabolism. The vacuole performs various functions, including storage of 
reserve nutrient (mainly glycogen), and recycling c ytoplasmic polymers, particularly 
proteins to contribute to the intracellular amino a cid pool. The vacuole is the only visible 
organelle in unstained yeast cells under the micros cope at 400x or 1000x magnification.  
The nucleus is only visible after staining for nucl eic acids, and observation of 
mitochondrial structure requires much greater magnification by electron microscope. 
 
 
 
Yeast reproduction 
 
The sequence of electron micrographs in Figure 2.1. 2 demonstrates the process of 
reproduction by budding in S.  cerevisiae ..  Because of the destructive nature of electron 
microscopy, the thin sections A – H could not be ta ken from the same cell, but show 
different cells of the same culture at successive s tages of the growth cycle.  These 
drawings were copied from the chapter on Yeast Cytology by Matile et al . in The Yeasts, 
vol 1 (1969), ed. Rose & Harrison.  Over the past 4 0 years their interpretation of the 
events observed in the sequence has been changed to  some extent, but they are still 
valid observations of actual yeast cells. 
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.1. Properties of Yeast 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010) 
 
Figure 2.1.2.  Electron micrographs of successive s tages of budding of 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae . 
 
 
A   Before committing itself to beginning a new repr oductive cycle, the yeast cell must 
have (a) completed all stages of the previous growt h cycle, (b) grown to at least the 
necessary minimum size and (c) confirmed that suffi cient nutrient is available for the 
next cycle.  Since reproduction is controlled by th e events in the nucleus over the cycle, 
early start is impossible under natural conditions..  It is not yet clear how the cell “knows” 
it is big enough, but the minimum size varies with cultural conditions.  For (c) the growth 
cycle will not start if the concentration of glucos e, or other utilizable carbohydrate, is too 
low, but experimental deficiency in other nutrients  does not inhibit growth.  Deficiency in 
these other nutrients could presumably be remedied from the cell’s own resources if 
necessary.  Cell A may be a new bud, or it may be o lder and just completed all the 
events of its previous growth cycle.  Whatever, the re will be either a birth scar or bud 
scar near the lower end of the cell (not shown).  T he cytoplasm is already in the correct 
configuration for the new cycle, with the vacuole n ear the previous scar and the plaque 
on the nuclear membrane (just below the top right m itochondrion, although its position is 
probably just accidental) is facing toward the site of the new bud.   
 
B,C.  The sequence A, B, C happens quickly, perhaps as little as 15 min if the yeast is 
growing at maximum growth rate, when a 2-h generati on cycle is possible at 25 – 30 oC..  
In B, the plaque has begun to develop fibres, and t he bunch of fibres has begun to split 
in C.  By the time of C there is a connection of endoplasmic reticulum between the  
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.1. Properties of Yeast 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010) 
nucleus and the site of the new bud, to direct the local softening of the cell wall glucan to 
allow the osmotic pressure within the cell to cause  the swelling which will grow to form 
the new bud.   The yeast cell in Figure 2.1.1 is al so about this stage, and the strand of 
endoplasmic reticulum is more obvious.  Softening t he cell wall glucan is potentially 
dangerous and very precise control of β1-6 glucanase is essential, or the cell will lose 
the structural strength of the cell wall and burst.   Note that stages A, B and C have been 
completed before the surface swelling is obvious by  light microscopy, normally the first 
visible indication that the cell has begun a new cell cycle. 
 
D, E .  New cell wall, membrane and cytoplasm are now be ing actively synthesized.  The 
growing bud must be provided with copies of  all of  the intracellular organelles of its 
parent, so in D and E parts of divided mitochondria, vacuole and other particles are seen 
to migrate into the bud.  In the nucleus, the plaque has already divided and the two parts 
are separating, stretching some of the fibres in th e process.  By stage E, the nuclear 
DNA has divided and separated into the two sacs on either side of the neck constricted 
by the fibres.  By this time the fragmented vacuole  has re-formed in the parent cell, 
although the vacuole material is still in the form of small particles in the bud. 
 
F  Here, one part of the divided nucleus is transfer red to the bud.  Current thinking is 
that the fibres stretch the nucleus forcing one hal f into the bud, but in F they seem to be 
pulling the nuclear wall in, rather than extending it.  Drawing F gave the impression that 
having a single large vacuole in the parent cell pr ovided the mechanical force to drive 
half of the stretched divided nucleus into the bud,  and that idea has not been completely 
abandoned, not least because of the apparently purposeful positioning of the vacuole. 
 
G. The fibres have broken and the two separate nucle i are sealed up as separate 
organelles, and the fibre material gradually disapp ears to leave bare plaques as in A.. 
Between stages F and G the nuclei have migrated tow ards the other end of their 
respective cells, and already the vacuole in the pa rent cell is moving into position for the 
next cycle.   
 
H.  Although not yet separated, the scar tissue between the cells is seen to be complete, 
in fact the drawing suggests that the cells are on the point of separating.  Some yeasts 
are able to begin a new cell cycle while still attached to the previous generation, and this 
is the mechanism for development of a pseudomyceliu m of strands of yeast-like cells.  
However, this is not true of most strains of S. cerevisiae ; physical separation is one of 
the pre-requisites for beginning a new cycle. In fa ct, a strain which did not require 
separation would be unsuitable as a distillery yeas t because of the resulting clumps. 
After separation of the cells in H, which would pro bably have happened only a few 
seconds later had they survived, only the parent ce ll is capable of immediate growth, 
which would be from some point on the left side of the cell.  The fact that the new cell is 
slightly smaller does not by itself prevent an imme diate start to a new growth cycle, but 
that is not possible yet for another reason: its va cuole material is still fragmented and 
must be restored to a single structure.   
 
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.1. Properties of Yeast 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010) 
Principles of yeast classification.  
  
Since yeasts can be grown in the laboratory by the same methods as are used for 
bacteria, a classification system has developed whi ch combines features from both 
fungal and bacterial taxonomy.  “Fungal” emphasis o n the shape of cells and spores 
defines the different genera, but species are disti nguished mainly by bacteriological-
style tests for growth on different substrates, mai nly sugars but also various alcohols 
and organic acids.  Most unicellular yeasts grow by  budding, either (a) multilateral, i.e. 
successive buds are formed on different parts of th e cell wall, or (b) bipolar, at opposite 
ends of the cell alternately.  A few genera grow by  binary fission.  These three types are 
illustrated as (a), (b) and (c) respectively in Fig ure 2.1.3.  In the drawing (b) the ends of 
the newly-divided cells where the next generation buds will form are marked X. 
 
 
Figure 2.1.3.  Multiplication of yeasts: (a) multilateral budding, (b) bipolar budding,  
(c) binary fission.  
 
About half of the known yeast genera form spores.  Although slightly more resistant to 
heat and drying than the vegetative cells, they are  not as effective for survival through 
adverse conditions as bacterial spores.  Rather the y are part of a more sophisticated 
growth cycle than would be possible by asexual budd ing alone.  Many filamentous fungi 
form spores within a specialised structure, the asc us, which is attached to the growing 
strands of hyphae.  With unicellular yeasts, such a  separate structure is not formed 
(except for some reason in the genus Lipomyces , which is of no concern to the distilling 
industry), so the spores are formed within the yeas t cell itself, which then technically 
becomes an ascus.   
 
Saccharomyces .is defined as a fermentative ascosporogenous yeast  genus growing by 
multilateral budding, and the various species of Saccharomyces  are distinguished 
mainly by their ability to grow on different sugars  or other carbon compounds.   S. 
cerevisiae  ferments glucose, sucrose and maltose, but individ ual strains can be 
distinguished by ability to metabolise aerobically or anaerobically other sugars, alcohols 
or organic acids as well.  Full details of classica l yeast taxonomy are beyond the scope 
of these notes, and only the key characteristics of  the more important yeast genera of 
the distilling industries are listed below. 
Hanseniaspora  and its non-sporing equivalent Kloeckera  are fermentative yeasts which 
grow by bipolar budding.  Although not capable of producing such high concentrations of 
ethanol as Saccharomyces , they are often the dominant yeasts of the early s tages of 
natural fermentations of grape must. 
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.1. Properties of Yeast 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010) 
Kluyveromyces  is a fermentative genus similar to Saccharomyces,  but forms spores in a 
different way.  Most species ferment lactose, there fore Kluyveromyces  spp. are 
important in industrial alcohol production as a by-product of the dairy industry. 
Pichia  has no fermentative ability and grows on sugars on ly under aerobic conditions.  
However some species produce ethanol aerobically an d have been investigated from 
time to time for production of bio-ethanol from the  pentoses of wood, which 
Saccharomyces  spp can not utilize.  It is possible for Pichia  contaminants to grow during 
aerobic culture of distillery yeast, also in the ea rly stages of a distillery fermentation 
before dissolved oxygen in the wort has been exhaus ted, and the volatile flavour 
congeners thus formed will produce unacceptable flavour in the spirit. . 
Hansenula  is similar to Pichia , but distinguished in the laboratory by the abilit y, rare in 
yeasts, to utilise nitrate as a.source of nitrogen for growth (most yeasts are restricted to 
ammonium salts or amino acids).  More importantly, some species of these two genera, 
but especially Hansenula , produce large amounts of ethyl acetate and/or iso -amyl 
acetate.  Therefore these yeasts can be important c ontributors to the flavour of natural 
ferment-ations for brandy and rum, but equally coul d be troublesome contaminants of 
brandy, rum or whisky if a high ester level is unwelcome.    
Schizosaccharomyces  is the only significant yeast genus which grows by  binary fission.  
It is the principal fermentative yeast of some loca l East African beers, a possible agent 
of the malo-lactic fermentation of ciders and wines , and is often part of the yeast flora of 
natural fermentations of molasses for dark rum production. 
 
And of  course, even though all of these yeasts men tioned above, including the genus 
Saccharomyce itself, grow in a desirable way in various commerci al fermentations, it is 
also possible they will grow when not wanted, as wild yeasts. 
 
 
Tests to distinguish strains of S. cerevisiae 
 
The pioneer yeast taxonomist, E.-C. Hansen of the C arlsberg laboratories in Denmark, 
distinguished various species of Saccharomyces  in the 1880s.  British ale yeast he 
named S. cerevisiae ; the lager yeast of his company became S. carlsbergensis .  
Various Saccharomyces  yeasts from wine he regarded as sufficiently diffe rent to justify 
specific names S. ellipsoideus  (from its oval shape), S. pastorianus  (latinized spelling of 
Pasteur) , S. uvarum (Latin uva = grape), etc.  There were no specific d istilling yeasts at 
that time.  His criteria for distinguishing species , on details of fermentation performance, 
are no longer acceptable for definition of species,  so all Hansen’s “species” are now S. 
cerevisiae , the earliest specific name to be published.  But although these former 
species are now all part of S. cerevisiae , since they have such different industrial 
properties, it is still often necessary to distinguish them.   
 
Measurement of fermentation performance, flavour pr oduction, etc in small-scale 
fermentations is one possibility for recognizing a specific strain.  However, since that 
may require a week or longer, more rapid tests are preferred.  Commercially available 
API test strips with a set of 19 different carbon c ompounds (no 20 is a blank to eliminate 
false positives), originally intended for identification of medically important yeasts, are  
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.1. Properties of Yeast 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010) 
equally suitable for identification of industrial s pecies.  Also, for a large species like S. 
cerevisiae , growth or not on galactose, α-methyl glucoside, trehalose, etc. can 
distinguish different strains after 2 days’ incubat ion.  These tests have no direct 
relevance to industrial fermentation performance; t heir value is that they can distinguish 
different strains, as do the commercially available  sets of filter-paper disks impregnated 
with various antibiotics or other inhibitors.  Even  after 24 h incubation with the disks, the 
zone of inhibition of a film of yeast spread on a plate of culture medium is obvious. 
  
Immunological methods 
 
The biological purpose of immunity is protection of birds and mammals against microbial 
disease, but its extremely high specificity is appl ied to many laboratory methods.  Only 
immunofluorescence will be described here, as a use ful method to detect or count 
contaminant yeasts or bacteria in pitching yeast or a fermentation.   
 
Definitions: Antibody  (AB) is a globulin protein produced in avian or ma mmalian tissues 
and body fluids in response to the presence of anti gen in the circulation, and reacts 
specifically with that antigen.  Antigen  (AG): any soluble or particulate protein or 
conjugated protein (glycoprotein, lipoprotein, etc)  in the circulation of a bird or mammal 
will stimulate the production of the corresponding AB, i.e. the individual has been 
immunized against that AG.   
 
For the simplest immunofluorescence technique, the reagent is AB to the bacterium or 
yeast to be detected, coupled to a dye.  The method  is most effective, since the 
contaminants are most easily observed, with a fluor escent dye excited by UV light, 
although that requires a microscope with quartz, no t glass, lenses, and UV filters for eye 
protection.  In a contaminated culture, only the co ntaminants fluoresce since only they 
are coated with fluorescent AB, and the majority po pulation of culture yeast remains 
dark (Figure 2.1.4A).  A more convenient method for  general use is a “sandwich” 
method.  A range of antibodies can be used, prepare d by immunization of rabbits 
against commonly encountered yeast or bacterial con taminants, but these are not  
coupled to the fluoro-chrome.  Instead, only a sing le fluorescent antibody is prepared 
against rabbit antibody protein (this must be prepa red in a different animal, e.g. sheep).  
There are two advantages of the “sandwich” method: only one fluorescent reagent is 
required for all the specific anti-contaminant anti bodies in use, and the fluorescence is 
enhanced by the number of sheep anti-rabbit AB mole cules attached to each target cell, 
as shown in Figure 2.1.4B.  In the drawing the enha ncement by the “sandwich” method 
appears to be only 2 X, but in 3 dimensions is actually much more.  The method depends 
on an antigenic difference between the contaminant and the culture yeast, so 
unfortunately is unlikely to work when the contaminant itself is S. cerevisiae . 
 
AB molecules are Y-shaped, with the specific reaction sites at the en ds of the two short 
arms.  Since the whole rabbit AB molecule is rabbit  protein, the AG which stimulated 
production of sheep anti-rabbit AB, sheep AB can re act with any part, so several 
fluorescent molecules can attach.  The rabbit and sheep antibodies are drawn differently 
in Figure 2.1.4B to clarify the explanation, but in  reality all mammalian antibodies of this 
type are identical in size. 
9 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.1. Properties of Yeast 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010) 
 
         
  
 
Figure 2.1.4.  Fluorescent antibody technique for d etection of contaminant yeast 
in culture yeast.   A, with specific anti-contaminant AB + fluorochro ms;  B, “sandwich” 
technique with unlabelled anti-contaminant AB + fluorescent sheep anti-rabbit AB. 
C = culture yeast, X= contaminant (in this case yea st, but the method is equally suitable 
for bacteria).   
 
 
Genetic characteristics of yeast 
 
Another type of test, again only possible where the  specialized laboratory equipment is 
available, is based on the genetic structure of the  yeast.  The first version, a simple test 
to determine the amount of guanine and cytosine in the DNA (mol % G + C) is widely 
used in taxonomy (classification) but can not be us ed for identification since many 
obviously different yeasts happen to have the same percentage.  But if two apparently 
similar yeast isolates showed very different % G + C values, they could not be the same 
genus or species.   
 
“DNA fingerprinting” is a more practicable method f or identification.  Nuclear (or more 
rarely, mitochondrial) DNA is chopped by a “restric tion enzyme” which attacks a specific 
sequence of (usually) six DNA bases.  So for a part icular DNA, where and how often 
that particular sequence occurs will provide a mixt ure of DNA fragments which are 
characteristic of the original DNA molecule, and el ectrophoresis and staining will show a 
characteristic pattern of lines.  Unless a large da tabase of patterns is available the 
method is unsuitable for identification of a new is olate.  Although it may not be possible 
to identify, i.e. name, a yeast or bacterial contam inant, certainly the method is ideal (if 
the lab equipment is available) for showing whether  successive instances of yeast or 
bacterial contamination are the same or different.   
 
10 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.1. Properties of Yeast 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010) 
Genetic improvement of distillery yeasts 
 
Since many people regard modern genetic manipulatio n to breed improved animals, 
plants or industrial micro-organisms with disapprov al or extreme annoyance, the 
Diploma syllabus is not concerned with such methods .  That leaves three possible 
methods for strain improvement: selection, mutation and hybridization.  
  
Selection.   Most yeast strains currently in use in the fermen tation industries have been 
specifically selected.  At its most basic, selectio n is operated in some traditional 
breweries by re-using the yeast from the most succe ssful fermentations.  More 
scientifically, plating out a successful culture for separate colonies and propagating each 
one of them as separate small-scale fermentation wi ll recognise the most useful strain 
which can then be preserved as the working culture.   That is the history of many 
cultured yeasts for wine production, and therefore brandy distilling; also for yeast and 
bacterial cultures used for dark rum fermentations.. 
 
Mutation , usually by ultra-violet irradiation to avoid the hazards of chemical mutagens. 
Mutation usually has a negative effect, inactivatin g a gene and therefore eliminating an 
enzymic activity.  In a few chance instances it is an inhibitor which is eliminated, 
therefore allowing the expression of an existing pr operty which could not be expressed 
before.  However, since yeasts of the fermentation industries are diploid or polyploid 
(two or multiple sets of chromosomes), a genetic change may not be expressed. 
 
Hybridization.   The principle of hybridization is that an animal,  plant or micro-organism 
with exactly the desired characteristics does not e xist, but some individuals have some 
of the properties, and other individuals have the o thers.  Breeding improved plant or 
animal stock by combining the desirable characteris tics of the parents has been 
practised over thousands of years.  The same principles can now be applied to yeasts. 
.   
Like almost all animals and plants, naturally occur ring Saccharomyces is a diploid 
genus, i.e. the nuclear chromosomes exist in pairs.  The mention of polyploidy (3 or 
more) above applies only to industrial strains, in which additional copies of genetic 
material have been added through numerous generatio ns of artificial culture.   In wild 
strains the two chromosomes of each pair are not id entical, and are termed a and α (to 
indicate almost, but not complete, identity).  Alth ough a/ α is not really the equivalent of 
male and female in animals and higher plants, yeast s can be bred on that basis.  Figure 
2.1.4 shows the various growth cycles of Saccharomyces .  A is the vegetative growth 
cycle by budding, illustrated in more detail in Fig ure 2.1.2.  The heterozygous diploid 
nucleus (hetero- since both a and α) divides, the a α unit is continued in both the parent 
cell and the bud, and so the cycle continues. 
 
If insufficient nutrient is available, but conditio ns are otherwise favourable (e.g. 
sporulation can occur only under aerobic conditions , even though limited vegetative 
growth is possible anaerobically), spores are forme d.  The first step of sporulation of S. 
cerevisiae  is nuclear doubling, then division to 4 haploid (s ingle chromosome) spores, 2 
of a and 2 of α.  In sporulation cycle BC, a 4-spored ascus is formed, then bursts 
11 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.1. Properties of Yeast 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010) 
liberating the haploid spores.  Subsequently, chanc e contact between an a and an α 
spore forms a zygote (fusion cell) and their nuclea r DNAs are combined in diploid form.  
Although the arrow beside C suggests immediate conv ersion, it is only when nutrient is 
again available that the spore zygote will germinat e to become a diploid heterozygous 
vegetative cell and revert to growth cycle A.  The fact that in S. cerevisiae  the ascus 
bursts before the spores are capable of mating is i mportant, making it unlikely (although 
not impossible) that two spores from the same ascus  will fuse.  In the laboratory, two 
spores, one from each of the parents with the desir ed properties, are dissected out 
under the microscope by micro-manipulator, and push ed together.  If of opposite mating 
types, they will fuse.  Actually, that is not 100% true, but reliable enough for the 
technique to work.  Then the zygote is transferred to nutrient medium to germinate, and 
tested for the desired hybridization. 
                      
  
Figure 2.1.4.  Life cycle of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . 
 
However, fairly soon it was realised that allowing isolated spores to germinate in nutrient 
medium (D) was preferable, since the resulting vege tative cells could be kept as stock 
cultures and propagated indefinitely by the vegetat ive haploid growth cycle E.  For  
hybridization, an α haploid culture carrying genetic properties which it is desired to breed 
into the a culture E is mixed with E and vegetative  fusion cells F are formed.  Nuclear 
hybridization occurs to a different extent in each zygote, so culture on a selective 
12 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.1. Properties of Yeast 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010) 
medium is necessary to select out the desired hybri ds.  Although the technique is 
relatively simple, obtaining the desired hybrids is  not only laborious but very much a 
matter of luck that (a) the necessary genetic combi nation occurs, and (b) the resulting 
hybrids have properties that allow them to be selec ted.  But the original M strain of 
distilling yeast, dating from the 1950s, is an exce llent example of the success of this 
method. 
 
 
Further reading 
Several chapters of Brewing Microbiology, edited by  F. G. Priest & I Campbell, are also 
applicable to the distilling industry.   
For further information on this module 2.1,  Chapte rs 1 (Systematics of Yeasts) and 3 
(Yeast Genetics) of the 2nd edition (1996) or Chapt ers 3 (Yeast Genetics) and 7 (Wild 
Yeasts in Brewing & Distilling) of the 3rd edition (2003) should be consulted. . 
 