1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation  & 
Maturation 
 
Unit 2.2 – Yeast Metabolism  
 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae  is identified in the laboratory by its fermentatio n of glucose, 
sucrose and maltose but most strains ferment other sugars as well.  The principal 
sugars of grape must are glucose and fructose, with  smaller amounts of sucrose and 
raffinose, therefore wine yeasts have to ferment al l of these.  The same sugars, but 
mainly sucrose, also occur in molasses, however it does not follow that wine (or brandy) 
and rum yeasts are interchangeable since geneticall y-controlled flavour production, 
discussed below, is also an important factor in cho ice of production strain(s).  Starchy 
cereals hydrolysed by malt produce maltose and smal ler amounts of glucose, 
maltotriose and the higher dextrins of the maltose series; a small amount of sucrose is 
also present.   The brewing yeasts originally used for cereal spirit production fermented 
only glucose, maltose, sucrose and maltotriose, but  modern distilling strains also 
ferment several other small (3-glucose) dextrins an d maltotetraose.  Finally, cereal 
hydrolysed by microbial enzymes varies in sugar com position according to the enzymes 
used, but could be almost 100% glucose.  Some of th e other sugars associated with 
malt activity could also be present, but certainly within the capability of a distilling strain 
bred for fermentation of cereal wort. 
 
 
Carbohydrate metabolism 
 
First, the fermentable sugars have to gain access t o the enzymic activity of the 
cytoplasm.   Sugars, certainly up to triose, diffus e freely through the cell wall and are 
transported across the cytoplasmic membrane by spec ific transport enzymes.  
Exceptions relevant to distilling yeasts are sucros e and raffinose, also lactose in the 
case of Kluyveromyces spp. used in bio-ethanol production from dairy wast es.  These 
sugars are hydrolysed by enzymes located in the cel l wall: sucrose to fructose and 
glucose, raffinose to fructose, glucose and galacto se, and lactose to galactose and 
glucose.  So, specific permeases for sucrose, raffi nose and lactose are unnecessary 
since the component monosaccharides already have their own.  Transport of sugars can 
be by either facilitated diffusion using the concen tration gradient across the cytoplasmic 
membrane, or active transport usually requiring hig h-energy adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP) of the cell, in which case it is sugar phosphate which enters the cell, anticipating  
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
the first step of metabolism, see below.  However a ctive systems may also involve entry 
of the nutrient being balanced by efflux of H +, K +, Na + or other ions from the cytoplasm. 
Whatever the method, a specific permease enzyme is obligatory.  The situation is 
summarized in Figure 2.2.1, which shows a simplifie d sketch of the permease system, 
mainly facilitated diffusion.  In the case of one g lucose molecule, active transport is also 
shown.  However, all of these permease activities w ould not occur together in real life, 
nor would facilitated diffusion and active transport of the same sugar at the same time.  
 
Figure 2.2.1 also shows the molecular structure of the cytoplasmic membrane: mainly a 
bi-layer of phospholipid (phosphoglyceride), inters persed with protein molecules, the 
transport protein, and sterol.  That is the structu re of membranes of fungi, plants and 
animals, but bacterial membranes do not contain ste rol.  However, the actual 
phospholipids of all known life forms are basically the same: glycerol 3-phosphate with a 
long-chain fatty acid (or occasionally alcohol) on carbon 1, and an unsaturated long 
chain acid on carbon 2.   X on carbon 3 is one of a small range of compounds containing 
a hydroxyl group which links to the phosphate group , e.g. choline, ethanolamine or 
inositol. 
. 
 CH 2O - long-chain fatty acid (FA) 
  | 
 CHO - long-chain unsaturated FA 
  | 
 CH 2O - PO 3 - X. 
 
In the membrane these molecules are orientated with  the hydrophilic glycerol on the 
outside and the two hydrophobic fatty acid “tails” within the membrane, as shown at the 
top of Figure 2.2.1.  Although technically a sem-pe rmeable membrane, its combination 
of hydrophilic and hydrophobic layers prevents osmo sis of all but a few ions and simple 
organic compounds.  Permease enzymes span the thick ness of the membrane bi-layer 
and by reacting with their specific substrate provi de a specific “pore” through the 
membrane.  
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
 
Figure 2.2.1.  Transport of sugars through the cyto plasmic membrane (plasma 
membrane) 
 
 
For yeasts, synthesis of the sterol and unsaturated  fatty acid components of the 
membrane involves reduction of the coenzyme Nicotin amidne Adenine Dinucleotide 
Phosphate (NADP), which requires molecular oxygen f or re-oxidation.  Therefore 
anaerobic growth is limited to 1 -2 generations, un less sufficient unsaturated fatty acids 
and sterols are provided ready-made (only possible in laboratory culture medium), in 
which case anaerobic growth can continue as long as the supplement is available. 
   
In grape juice, fructose and glucose in equal amoun t make up almost all of the sugar 
content.  Effectively that is also the case in mola sses wort since, although largely 
sucrose, that is hydrolysed in the cell wall and th e membrane is presented with fructose 
and glucose.  The situation in cereal wort is more complicated.  Sugars are transported 
in order of molecular size, smallest first, and not  according to concentration in the wort.  
So the normal sequence is monosaccharide glucose first, then the successively larger  
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
units maltose, maltotriose and malto-tetraose (the last not shown in Figure 2.2.1, but all 
three are transported and hydrolysed in a similar m anner).  Maltose permease is an 
inducible enzyme, produced only in the presence of maltose, but also is inhibited by 
glucose and activated only when the concentration o f glucose falls sufficiently low, the 
actual value varying between strains.  So, two of t he possible strategies for faster 
fermentation for industrial strains are (a)  breedi ng out the inhibition by glucose, and (b) 
introducing additional and constitutive (i.e. alway s expressed) maltose permease genes 
for earlier and more rapid transport.  A similar si tuation applies with maltotriose, which 
normally is metabolised only when maltose is exhausted.   
 
 
Metabolic pathways 
 
Under aerobic conditions S. cerevisiae  oxidizes sugars to CO 2 and water, creating 
(theoretically) the same amount of energy that woul d be released by burning the sugar 
in air.  Anaerobically,  only a partial oxidation i s possible, to ethanol and CO 2, and 
yielding only about 8% of the energy obtained by co mplete oxidation.  The percentage 
varies according to what is measured: that 8% estim ate is based on the amount of ATP 
or similar energy-rich molecules generated (see bel ow).  The two biological purposes of 
the metabolism of sugars are to harness as much of that energy as possible for 
biosynthetic activities of the cell, and to create the low-MW “building blocks” of organic 
compounds for the creation of new cell material.  T he cell must be able to synthesise its 
own weight of biomass over one generation time. To fulfill both of these aims the 
metabolism of sugars is in a gradual series of enzyme-mediated transformations. 
 
The Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas metabolic pathway, conve rting of hexose sugars mainly 
to pyruvate, is the most important of these mechani sms, and it can operate both 
aerobically and anaerobically.  First, the various hexoses, either transported int that form 
or produced by hydrolysis of di- or tri-saccharides  within the cell, have to be isomerised 
to fructose.  Then the pathway proceeds as shown in  Figure 2.2.2.  The enzymes are 
not named, since that is not required by the syllab us, but full details can be found in any 
biochemistry textbook.  
 
The starting point is shown as glucose, but could e qually well be any other hexose that 
the yeast can metabolise (i.e. transport, phosphory late and isomerise).  Whatever the 
hexose, or rather the hexose phosphate after step 1 , it must first be isomerised to 
fructose 1-phosphate.  The reason is that after the  second phosphorylation, fructose 1-6 
diphosphate is a symmetrical molecule, and is split  into two triose units of 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate.  An alternative product  is dihydroxy-acetone phosphate, 
which is interchangeable with glyceraldehyde 3-phos phate by an isomerase reaction.  
Subsequent enzymic reactions generate ATP as an ene rgy supply for cell activities, and 
the final product is pyruvate ion, or pyruvic acid.            
 
The Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway is also shown in  an even more simplified form 
as Figure 2.2.3, where 1 molecule of hexose (C 6)  is phosphorylated  to C 6P and then 
C6P2.  These are  energy-requiring reactions, provided by the energy-rich bond between  
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
ADP and the third phosphate group making up ATP.  F ructose diphosphate C 6P2 is split 
to 2 molecules of triose phosphate (2 x C 3P) which after a succession of reactions yields 
pyruvate C 3 and a gain of 2 ATP.  In Figure 2.2.2 the reductio n of NAD is shown 
correctly as NAD + to NADH, but in Figure 2.2.3 as NAD to NADH 2 to give a better 
impression of the reduction involved.  The letter P  alone represents PO 3
3- ion (inorganic 
phosphate).   
 
The overall chemical equation of the EMP main pathway is: 
 
      Hexose  + 2 ATP + 2 NAD + 2 P  =>  2 pyruvate + 4 ATP  + 2 NADH 2 
 
i.e. a “profit” of 2 ATP molecules for every hexose  molecule oxidized to pyruvate.  
Inorganic phosphate is used up, 2 PO 3
3- ions for every molecule of hexose, but 
adequate phosphate is present in cereal worts, and can be added if necessary to grape 
and molasses fermentations.  The serious problem is  the reduction of NAD: the very 
small amounts of that essential enzyme co-factor wi thin the cell must be continually re-
oxidised for growth to occur.   
 
As well as glycerol for phospholipid production, th e glycerol branch generates the 
oxidized form of NAD:  
         
          Hexose + 2 ATP + 2 NADH 2 + 2 P => 2 glycerol + 2 ATP + 2 NAD 
 
but no new energy (ATP) is generated, so the.glycerol route has only limited value to the 
cell.  Its significance is that in stressful anaero bic conditions, when re-oxidised NAD is a 
valuable commodity, the glycerol pathway is a possible source.   
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
                                    
  
 
Figure 2.2.2.  Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway. 
 
 
ADP/ATP = Adenosine Di/Tri-Phosphate; NAD = Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide 
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
 
 
Figure 2.2.3.  Simplified outline of Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway. 
 
 
The EMP pathway can not operate in isolation, it mu st be coupled to some mechanism 
for re-oxidation of NADH (or NADH 2, using the nomenclature in Figure 2.2.3).   
In aerobic conditions, atmospheric oxygen is the ox idizing agent.  The tricarboxylic acid 
cycle, also known as the Krebs cycle (Figure 2.2.4)  sequentially oxidizes the carbon of 
pyruvate to 3 CO 2.   
The enzymes of the Krebs cycle are located in the m itochondria, whcih must be fully 
functional for the cycle to operate.   
First, pyruvate is decarboxylated to become acetate , in the form of acetyl coenzyme A 
(acetyl CoA).  Acetyl (2-C) enters the cycle by com bining with oxaloacetic acid (4-C) to 
form the 6-C compound citric acid.  The energy to d rive that reaction is provided by the 
bond between acetyl and CoA, the same type of energ y-rich bond as between ADP and 
the third phosphate of ATP.  In the course of the c ycle two further carbon atoms are 
removed as CO 2.  After succinic acid  (4-C) various conversions a re necessary to return 
to oxalo-acetic acid and entry into the next cycle.   
Atmospheric O 2 is not shown, but is the oxidizing agent for regen eration of the reduced 
NAD and the other coeenzymes involved in the cycle:  (NAD phosphate NADP, and 
Flavin Adenine Dinucleotide FAD).  Guanosine di- an d tri-phosphate, GDP and GTP, 
function in a similar manner to ADP/ATP.   
Free coenzyme A is attached to a sulphydryl group, hence CoASH. 
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
    
 
 
Figure 2.2.4.   Krebs cycle (tricarboxylic acid cycle). 
 
The Krebs cycle is important for oxidative aerobic metabolism to complete the oxidation 
started by the EMP pathway, not only in most aerobi c micro-organisms but also in the 
animal kingdom.  It is also highly effective in cre ating energy.  Although not shown in 
Figure 2.2.4, from each pyruvate molecule oxidized to 3 CO 2, 12 ATP molecules are 
generated by the oxidative phosphorylation and elec tron transfer reactions within the 
mitochondria to reoxidise the reduced coenzymes NAD H 2 etc.  Krebs is mainly involved 
in the aerobic propagation of yeast, but it is poss ible for part of the circle to function 
anaerobically, in reverse from pyruvate to succinat e, and no longer a “cycle”, forming 
succinate for biosynthetic activities of the cell.  With the expenditure of one ATP unit of 
energy, combination with CO 2 converts pyruvate into oxaloacetate for biosynthes is of 
succinate when more efficient routes are not availa ible.  There is also the advantage of 
providing one molecule each of oxidized FAD and NAD  per molecule of pyruvate 
processed, which is important under anaerobic condi tions. It is not clear whether the 
anaerobic enzymic activity occurs in the degenerate mitochondria, or in the cytoplasm. 
9 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Another pathway of aerobic growth in the yeast fact ory or the first few hours of distillery 
fermentation is the pentose phosphate pathway, whic h operates simultaneously with 
EMP and Krebs..  Although not obvious in Figure 2.2 .5, under aerobic conditions the 
pathway can oxidize glucose 6-phosphate to 6 CO 2, 6 H 2O and inorganic phosphate.  
But it also produces biosynthetic building blocks o f 3 – 7 carbon atoms, which is an 
important contribution in the limited time-scale of  aerobic conditions before anaerobic 
fermentation begins. There are alternative anaerobi c syntheses for the pentoses ribose 
and deoxyribose for RNA and DNA synthesis, but the pentose phosphate pathway in its 
brief operation at the start of fermentation is probably the most important.source of these 
sugars  
 
Ribulose 5-phosphate is converted by isomerase and epimerase reactions to equal 
amounts of ribose 5-P and xylulose-5P.  Subsequent trans-aldolase or -ketolase 
reactions create combinations of 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7-c arbon sugars all adding up to 10, and 
all of which are possible building blocks for biosy nthetic activities.  The 3- and 6-carbon 
compounds at the end of the sequence progress to EMP glycolysis.                          
 
 
Figure 2.2.5.  Pentose phosphate (or hexose monophosphate) pathway.  
10 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Various methods have evolved for recovery of NAD un der anaerobic conditions.  The 
simplest is reduction of pyruvate to lactate, usually as lactic acid. 
 
            CH 3.CO.COOH - + NADH 2  =>  CH 3.CHOH.COOH + NAD 
 
In a distillery context, that is the mechanism used  by the homolactic group of lactic acid 
bacteria which have a permanently anaerobic metabol ism, even in the presence of air.  
More importantly, it is also used in the animal kin gdom.  For strenuous muscle activity, 
beyond the capacity of our lungs to dissolve the ne cessary amount of oxygen in the 
blood, we can briefly use the anaerobic lactic pathway to maintain metabolic activity. 
 
For the alcohol fermentation industries the importa nt method of NAD recovery is 
decarboxylation of pyruvic acid (therefore requiring acid pH) to acetaldehyde, and then 
reduction to ethanol.  The second enzyme, alcohol d ehydrogenase, is named from the 
opposite reaction where its activity was first disc overed, but like most enzymes it 
operates equally well in either direction.  Note al so that it acts on aliphatic alcohols in 
general, not just ethanol. 
                                                 (+  2H from NADH 2)  
 CH 3.CO.COOH            =>               CH 3.CHO +  CO 2  =>           CH 3.CH 2OH 
          ( pyruvic decarboxylase)                    (alcohol dehydrogenase) 
             
Therefore the final result of metabolism of a molec ule of glucose or other hexose by 
yeast is: 
 
   C 6H12 O6  + 2ADP + 2 P (inorganic phosphate) => 2 CH 3.CH 2OH + 2 CO 2  + 4ATP 
or  MW 180                  2 x 46 = 92     2 x  44  = 88  
 
i.e. approximately equal yield of ethanol and CO 2, by weight.  Although the biological 
purpose of the ATP is to supply the energy-requirin g activities of the cell, mainly 
synthesis of new cell material from simple nutrient s or metabolites, a significant 
proportion of the metabolic energy is wasted as heat.       
 
Fermentative yeasts like S. cerevisiae  grow by aerobic or anaerobic metabolism 
according to the availability of oxygen.  This is t he Pasteur effect, which he is credited 
with discovering in his studies on facultatively an aerobic bacteria.  However, the 
situation with yeasts is not quite so simple becaus e of the Crabtree effect, first observed 
in research on human liver cells switching between oxidative metabolism and anaerobic 
lactic acid production.  The equivalent Crabtree ef fect for fermentative yeasts is that if 
the fermentable sugar is above about 0.5% (the prec ise amount varies between yeast 
species and between strains of S. cerevisiae ), metabolism is anaerobic even in the 
presence of atmospheric oxygen.  Only when the conc entration of fermentable sugar 
falls below the critical level will the more effici ent oxidative metabolism begin.  So far as 
distillery fermentations are concerned, initial sug ar concentrations are well above that 
level therefore oxidative metabolism will not happe n, but the dissolved oxygen in the 
must/wort is put to good use to synthesise cell components that require aerobic  
11 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
conditions.  Once the dissolved oxygen is consumed,  mitochondria are no longer 
required and begin the degeneration associated with anaerobiosis.    
 
 
 
Numerous other metabolic pathways, but the followin g account is limited to those 
relevant to distillery fermentations.   Zymomonas , the natural inoculum of agave sap for 
tequila, and of interest to the bio-ethanol industr y since as a bacterium it is capable of 
indefinite anaerobic growth, uses the Entner-Doudoroff pathway (Figure 2.2.6).   
 
The yield of only 1 ATP per molecule of hexose seem s inefficient, but is enough for 
successful growth, and probably reduces the cooling requirements of fermentations.    
Finally, the heterolactic group of lactic acid bact eria, possible contaminants of all three 
of brandy, rum and whisky fermentations, have a com plex pathway of NAD recovery 
(Figure 2.2.7).  Incidentally, although not shown i n the homo- or hetero-lactic pathways, 
lactic acid bacteria produce significant amounts of diacetyl, which can distil with the spirit 
giving a butter or butterscotch aroma, which is particularly noticeable in neutral spirit. 
 
 
                
 
 
Figure 2.2.6.  Entner-Doudoroff  pathway ( Zymomonas spp.) 
12 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
 
     
  
 
Figure 2.2.7.  “Heterolactic” pathway of some Lactobacillus  and Pedioccus  sp. 
 
 
Production of flavour compounds 
 
Flavour congeners are produced as by-products of the fermentation of sugars to alcohol. 
Although only the principal types of congener are s hown in Table 2.2.1, approximately 
400 flavour metabolites are formed during alcoholic fermentation by yeast and contribute 
to the flavour of beers, ciders, wines and distilled spirits.  These compounds vary in their 
importance to the quality of the final product, and  in the case of distilled spirits, their 
volatility is as important as their aroma threshold , the concentration just detectable by a 
trained sensory panel. 
 
Table 2.2.1.  Principal products of yeast fermentations. 
 
Alcohols  Acids   Esters   Others   
Ethanol  Acetic   Ethyl acetate  CO 2 
Propanol  Caproic  and any other Acetaldehyde 
Butanols  Caprylic  combination   Diacetyl 
Amyl alcohols Pyruvic  of acids and  H 2S 
Glycerol  Succinic  alcohols on   Mercaptans 
Phenylethanol    the left  Thiols   
13 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
The important aspects of carbohydrate metabolism du ring fermentation are: (a) uptake 
of the fermentable sugars from the must/wort, (b) p roduction of ethanol and flavour 
congeners within the yeast cells and (c) excretion of the metabolites as flavour of the 
beer/wine/wash and ultimately of the rum/brandy/whi sky.  However, the majority of the 
important flavour congeners are by-products of bios ynthesis of lipids, nucleic acids and 
proteins. 
 
 
Nitrogen metabolism 
 
All of the amino acids required for protein (mainly  enzyme) synthesis for yeast growth 
are present in adequate quantity malt whisky wort, in smaller amounts but usually 
sufficient in grape juice and unmalted cereal worts , but probably are deficient in 
blackstrap molasses (definitely so in high-test)..  Up to about 150 mg/litre, the higher the 
-amino N content of the culture medium the greater is the amount of yeast growth.  
However, it is impossible for the limited space of the yeast cell membrane to contain 
individual permeases for each of the 20 structural amino acids of proteins.  So, only a 
few amino acids have specific transport enzymes and  most have to share.  Table 2.2.2, 
based on brewing research but now known to be equal ly applicable to other alcohol 
fermentations by S. cerevisiae ,.shows a comparison of the rate of uptake of indiv idual 
amino acids: effectively a summary of their transport systems.   
 
Table 2.2.2.  Classification of amino acids by their rate of absorption from wort 
 
A:   Rapidly absorbed  B: Slowly absorbed  C:  Slowly absorbed 
    from start of       from start of       late in  fermentation 
    fermentation       fermentation        
Aspartic acid/amine  Histidine    
Glutamic acid/amine  Isoleucine   All other amino a cids, 
Lysine    Leucine              also NH 4
+ as a  
Argine, serine, threonine Methionine                              nitrogen source 
    Valine 
    Proline, hydroxyproline     
 
Only aspartic acid and asparagine (both transported  by the same enzyme), glutamic 
acid and glutamine (ditto) and lysine have their ow n specific transport enzymes.  
Arginine, serine and threonine share a single perme ase, so the rate and amount of 
uptake of each individual amino acid is in proporti on to their relative amounts in the 
culture medium, but all are absorbed at a sufficien tly rapid rate to satisfy the 
requirements of the growing cells for these amino acids.   
Proline and hydroxyproline are absorbed only early in the fermentation, but enough for 
the subsequent requirements of the yeast.  The othe r five amino acids of group B share 
a single permease system, so they are not individua lly absorbed in sufficient amount to 
meet the requirements of protein synthesis during a ctive yeast growth.  All amino acids 
and NH 4
+ can be transported by a general amino-acid permeas e (GAP), but that is 
inactive while specific transport of the group A an d B amino acids is in operation, 
suppressed in an analogous way to maltose permease in the presence of glucose.  
14 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Therefore the compounds listed as group C, which ar e totally dependent on GAP for 
transport, are absorbed only late in the fermentati on, too late to be incorporated into 
enzyme structure during the phase of active growth.   For the development of the next 
generation bud the growing yeast cell must synthesi se its own weight of cell material 
from the nutrients in the wort, and that includes a ll of its requirements of group C amino 
acids and any supplement required to the limited up take of group B.  Lysine can not be 
used for synthesis of other proteins, since its –NH 2 groups can not be transaminated by 
Saccharomyces  spp (which provides a useful laboratory technique for isolating non-
Saccharomyces  wild yeasts from a fementation, see unit 2.4), the  amino groups of 
aspartic acid/asparagine and glutamic acid/glutamin e have to provide the amino 
nitrogen for biosynthesis of other amino acids.   
 
As an example of biosynthesis of amino acids, the m ain stages of the pathway to valine 
are: 
      pyruvate  =>    acetolactate    =>     α-keto isovalerate     =>        valine 
CH 3.CO.COO -      CH 3.CO     (CH 3) 2 .CH.CO.COO -       (CH 3) 2 .CH.CH.COO -  
       |             | 
         CH 3,C(OH) COO -     .    NH 2 
 
The final step is a transaminase reaction with aspartic or glutamic acids (or amines): 
 
                                      
  
 
If the necessary sources of amino-N are not availab le, α-keto isovaleric acid is 
decarboxylated and then reduced to alcohol by the e quivalent reaction to pyruvate > 
acetaldehyde > ethanol: 
 
(CH 3) 2 .CH.CO.COOH  => (CH 3) 2 .CH.CHO + CO 2 =>  (CH 3) 2 .CH.CHOH, iso -butanol.   
 
Therefore there is a relationship between valine an d iso-butanol: if there is insufficient N 
available to synthesise valine, isobutanol is formed instead. 
       
 
Not all amino acids have such a simple structural relationship with the alternative alcohol 
under anaerobic fermentation conditions, but Figure  2.2.8 gives a basic summary of the 
formation of the various keto acid intermediates re quired for synthesis of amino acids.  
Although most enzyme-mediated reactions are reversi ble, several of the chain of 
reactions (not shown for simplicity) between acetyl  CoA and keto-acids are not.  If the 
supply of amino N is exhausted, obviously the keto acids can not be converted to the 
intended amino acids.  However, keto acids represen t a valuable oxidising resource 
which can not be permitted to accumulate under the anaerobic conditions of 
fermentation.  So if they can not be converted to a mino acids, the keto acids are 
decarboxylated to the equivalent aldehyde and reduc ed to an alcohol by analogous 
reactions to the metabolism of pyruvate to ethanol.  The general alcohol dehydrogenase  
15 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
reduces the aldehyde to its corresponding alcohol, although a specific decarboxylase is 
required for reach keto acid.  
Therefore if depletion of amino-N prevents conversi on of α-keto isovalerate to valine, 
iso-butanol is formed instead; equivalent failure o f the transamination of α-keto 
isocaproic acid to leucine results in formation of iso-amyl alcohol.  
It is also possible that even though amino-N is ava ilable, the yeast may convert part of 
its keto acid supply to higher alcohols in order to generate oxidized  NAD.   
 
This response to a redox problem is similar to the production of glycerol and NAD by the 
EMP pathway (also shown in Figure 2.2.8), or succin ate by a reversed and partial Krebs 
cycle to generate a “profit” of oxidised NAD and FAD (Figure 2.2.4). 
 
 
 
Figure 2.2.8.  Biosynthesis of amino acids, and NAD recycling. 
 
 
 
Although its production is more complex, diacetyl i s another by-product of amino-acid 
biosyntheis.  Iso-butanol is the higher alcohol ass ociated with valine synthesis (see 
above, and Figure 2.2.9), but acetolactate, an earl ier intermediate in the pathway, may 
be decarboxylated and reduced to acetoin and 2,3 bu tane diol by similar reactions to 
conversion of pyruvate to ethanol, and also generating valuable NAD.   
Any acetoin and 2,3 butane diol excreted into the f ermentation can be converted to 
diacetyl by chemical oxidation, for example by the oxygen dissolved by the turbulence of 
filling the still charger vessel and the still itse lf.  Since chemical reactions are 
accelerated by higher temperature, oxidation to dia cetyl is rapid, although brief, in the 
early stages of distillation.  With its low aroma t hreshold, less than 1 mg/litre to a trained 
panellist, and similar volatility to ethanol, diacetyl formation is potentially serious.   
 
Diacetyl is one of the few compounds that it is imp ossible to remove completely from 
neutral spirit. 
16 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
 
 
Figure 2.2.9.  Formation of diacetyl.  
 
 
Fatty acid and ester production 
 
Esters are another group of the flavour congeners f ormed during fermentation.  Non-
enzymic esterification is too slow to account for the esters produced during fermentation, 
but is certainly important over the longer time-sca le of maturation.  Production of esters 
during fermentation is related to the recycling of the enzyme cofactor, coenzyme A   
Acetyl and longer-chain fatty acid CoAs are importa nt intermediates in biosynthetic 
activities, but a proportion of these compounds is lost to the culture medium, to appear 
as flavour congeners (Table 2.2.7).  Acetyl CoA and  its higher homologues, collectively 
listed as R-CO~S.CoA in Figure 2.2.10 (note the ene rgy-rich ~ bond), are important 
intermediates in the biosynthesis of enzyme protein s, nucleic acids and lipids.  If, 
however, the acetyl or higher acyl CoA is not required, it must be recycled to recover the 
energy of the ~ bond, and maintain the limited intracellular supply of CoA itself.  
  
 
 
Figure 2.2.10.  Recycling of acetyl CoA. 
 
On removal of the CoA, the acid group is stabilised  by esterification, with the 
involvement of an esterase enzyme (esterases, like most enzymes, catalyse the 
reaction in either direction).  Since acetate and e thanol are the acid and alcohol formed 
in greatest amount during fermentation, naturally ethyl acetate is the ester in greatest  
17 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
amount, although other esters with lower aroma thre shold may have more sensory 
effect..  The wider implications of recycling CoA a re shown in Figure 2.2.11, which 
indicates the sources of ethanol, higher alcohols a nd the various acid groups involved in 
ester production. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.2.11.  Ester, higher alcohol and lipd synthesis during fermentation. 
 
 
 
Sulphur metabolism  
 
Biosynthesis of the amino acids cysteine and methio nine creates, with respect to both 
nitrogen and sulphur, analogous flavour problems to  other amino acids, but is more 
serious because of the low aroma threshold of the S -containing by-products.  Another 
source of sulphury off-flavours is the reduction of  SO 4
2-, from the water supply or raw 
materials, to S 2- in the course of fermentation.  Much of the H 2S itself is stripped off by 
CO 2 during fermentation, but less volatile organic S c ompounds may remain in 
unacceptable amount.  Copper still surfaces should remove these off-flavours in the 
course of distillation, but some may remain, requir ing removal during maturation: see 
unit 2.7 for discussion of the problems.  The origi n of objectionable thiols and 
mercaptans is shown in Figure 2.2.12.   
 
 
Figure 2.2.12.  Formation of sulphur compounds as by-products of  
   biosynthesis of sulphur amino acids.   
 
18 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
In summary, the production of flavour congeners is generally according to Table 2.2.3, 
but various modifying factors may give different results from time to time. 
 
Table 2.2.3.  Summary of factors affecting higher a lcohol and ester production by 
yeast. 
 
Cultural conditions  Effect on higher alcohol  Effe ct on ester 
    production    production______________  
Increased growth of yeast Increase    Decrease 
(higher temperature,  (less available amino N)  (le ss recycled CoA) 
increased dissolved O 2)___________________________________________________________  
Decreased growth of yeast Decrease    Increase 
(lower temperature,  (more available amino N)  (mor e recycled CoA) 
decreased dissolved O 2)___________________________________________________________  
Deficiency of amino N  Increase (less available  Us ually decrease. 
(unlikely in grain spirit,  –NH 2)     If less growth, less  
possible in brandy/rum)          recycled CoA______ _______  
Deficiency of oxidized  Increase (to generate NAD)        Neutral, or decrease if 
NAD         less growth_______________  
Sufficiency of oxidized Neutral or decrease   Neutr al, or decrease  
NAD         if more growth____________  
Genetic properties   Increase or decrease, accordin g to properties of the yeast_________  
 
 
 
Growth factors  
 
In addition to the carbon and nitrogen provided by sugars and amino acids, growth of 
yeasts requires organic growth factors, equivalent to the vitamins of human nutrition, 
and various inorganic ions.  Most of the important inorganic ions, e.g. Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, 
Mn and Zn are required only in trace amounts as co- factors of enzymes.  Mains, 
borehole or river water can be relied on to provide  sufficient quantity of each.  Na, P and 
S are required in greater amounts. Na is involved i n transport across cell membranes, 
and recent research suggests that Mg is also requir ed in rather more than trace 
amounts for optimal growth, for the same reason.  P hosphate and sulphate are nutrients 
rather than growth factors: phosphate for structura l phospholipids as well as the smaller 
amounts required for ATP and similar compounds, and  sulphate mainly for synthesis of 
S-containing amino acids for protein synthesis.  Na , Mg, PO 3 and SO 4 ions are present 
in adequate amount in cereal wort, which is just as  well since supplements are illegal in 
many whisky-producing countries.  However, some bat ches of grape juice or molasses 
may be deficient in these salts, certainly addition  of ammonium phosphate is common 
practice as a source of N and P. 
 
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) is essentia l in trace amounts for many 
metabolic pathways.  Humans are unable to synthesis e nicotinamide, also known as 
niacin or vitamin B 6, so it must be provided in our diet.  Some strains of S. cerevisiae   
19 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.2. Yeast Metabolism  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
also have that requirement, although most can synthesise their own from simpler carbon 
and nitrogen compounds. All known strains of S. cerevisiae  require the enzyme co-
factor biotin, which is also a human vitamin, but o therwise the requirement for trace 
amounts of riboflavin, thiamine, and the other enzyme co-factors varies between strains.  
At one time these varying vitamin deficiencies were  used to distinguish production 
strains in the laboratory, but because of the extre mely small amounts required for full 
growth, false results were a frequent problem.  Sin ce the fermentable substrates of the 
distilling industry are natural products their grow th factor (vitamin) content is normally 
sufficient for yeast growth.  It is true that bioti n deficiency in molasses is often a problem 
in aerobic cultivation of baking and distilling yea sts, but aerobic growth is many times 
greater than during an alcohol fermentation. 
 
The limit on yeast growth during a fermentation res ults from the inability to synthesise 
the unsaturated fatty acids and sterols of membrane  structure under anaerobic 
conditions.  Therefore atmospheric oxygen could be provided as a growth factor, 
although in practice the reserve of membrane materi al from the original aerobic 
cultivation in the yeast factory allows sufficient growth for successful fermentation 
 
 
 
Further reading 
Chapter 4, Yeast and Fermentation (I. Campbell) in Whisky: Technology, Production 
and Marketing, ed. I. Russell, 2003, deals specific ally with whisky distilling 
fermentations; but Brewing Microbiology, ed. F. G. Priest & I Campbell, is also relevant.  
Chapter 2, Biochemistry and Physiology of Yeast Gro wth was written by different 
authors in 2nd edition 1996 (T. W. Young) and 3rd i n 2003 (J. C. Slaughter), so both 
should be consulted if possible to take advantage of the different views.   
Alternatively, the account of yeast biochemistry in  Brewing (M. J. Lewis & T. W. Young, 
1995) is perfectly acceptable for Diploma in Distilling candidates    
Also, anyone with access to the several large and e xpensive brewing textbooks which 
have appeared since 2000 will find their accounts of yeast biochemistry useful.   