1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 1A: Raw Materials & Preparation of 
Cereal Wort 
 
Unit 1A.1 – Barley 
 
1A.1.1  The Physiology and Morphology of Barley  
 
Introduction 
Barley traditionally and technically can be conside red the most important cereal used in 
the preparation of wort.  In its malted form barley provides the carbohydrate, protein and 
vitamins for yeast growth. Hydrolytic (fragmenting)  enzymes derived from the malt 
release and convert these latter substances into as similable forms for the yeast to 
metabolise. 
 
Barley and other cereals such as wheat, maize, rice , oats, and sorghum belong to the 
family of grasses ( Gramineae) . 
Barley is classified as: 
 
/head2right Family = Gramineae.  
/head2right Subfamily = Festucoideae 
/head2right Tribe = Triticeae 
/head2right Genus = Hordeum  
 
Distillers commonly malt two species of barley: 
 
/head2right Hordeum vulgare  – 6-Rowed barley has been used to produce high enzymi c malt 
for grain distilling. Before the UK joined the EU, Canadian 6-row barley was the 
preferred barley for Scottish maltsters producing t his type of malt. Since 6-rowed 
varieties have a much smaller grain size than 2-row ed, the former yield more 
embryo/aleurone systems per tonne and so generate a  higher concentration of 
enzymes per tonne of malt. 
 
/head2right Hordeum distichon – 2- Rowed barley is principally used for malting alt hough lt. 
These different types of barley can be further divi ded between winter sown and 
spring sown. In the Northern hemisphere many winter  barleys are 6-rowed but few 
are of malting quality. The 2-rowed malting varieties are generally spring sown.  
 
Winter and spring varieties are grown primarily for  agronomic and climatic reasons, the 
different species producing maximal yields under different growth conditions.  By 
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
sowing varieties that ripen at different times or b y planting fields of both winter and 
spring barley, the latter usually ripening later, the harvest can then be staggered.   
 
Staggering the harvest realizes added benefits incl uding ensuring a continuous supply 
of barley for malting if the appropriate varieties are sown, without incurring excessive 
storage costs.   
Storage costs are further maintained through careful purchase and use.   
 
Staggering the harvest also assures a tide over sup ply if levels of spring barley are low 
and/or expressing high levels of dormancy. For exam ple, in the Northern Hemisphere, 
winter barley is sown in September and harvested in  July whereas spring barley is 
sown in February – March and is harvested in August -September.  
Typically in the U.K, malting quality barleys have been spring sown, but some winter 
varieties have become more common.   
 
Some sources suggest that the earlier the seed is s own, weather permitting, the 
greater the starch accumulation and the lower the t otal grain nitrogen, but others 
believe it to be more the effect of warm summer ripening compared to cooler conditions 
during final development.   
This produces a crop with greater yield and potentially higher extract values. 
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.1.1.1. Barley Plant Development  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.1  Schematic diagram of a barley kernel in longitudinal section 
 
 
When  a barley kernel germinates, plant growth proceeds as follows: 
1). Growth initiates with chitting, i.e the emergen ce of the coleorhiza (root sheath) 
from the proximal end of the grain.  This extends a nd branches forming the seminal 
roots. The embryo derives energy to begin the growt h cycle firstly from the small 
reserve of sugars (principally sucrose and raffinos e) within the germ and then from 
starch in the endosperm.  This is effected by the t ransfer of the plant hormone, 
giberellic acid (GA), from the embryo into the dors al side aleurone layer, via a 
vascular bundle. Hydrolytic enzymes are synthesised  in the aleurone, triggered by 
GA, and  difuse into the endosperm where they break  down the cell walls and 
gradually hydrolyse and dissolve the starch into gl ucose. The glucose passes into 
the embryo by difussion through the scutellar epith elial cells and is metabolised into 
sucrose en-route. Amino acids created by the hydrol ysis of endosperm protein are 
transmuted in the same manner. Eventually the whole  contents of the endospem 
food store are metabolised to generate the embryonic plant.  
(This transfer of the carbohydrate and protein food  reserves from the endosperm 
involves the same hydrolytic enzymes which modify t he endosperm during the 
malting process. However there are significant diff erences. During plant 
development the endosperm hydrates to very high lev els (>50%) so that 
synthesised cell wall, protein and starch degrading  enzymes can freely move 
throughout the whole endosperm tissue. Cell wall degrading glucanases dissolve all 
Pr oximal end  
Acrospire & 
coleoptile 
Roolet & 
coleorhiza 
Embryo 
Scutellum  
Starchy 
endosperm Husk (lemma)  
Awn  
Aleurone  
Husk (palea) Pericarp & 
Testa 
Micropylar 
region 
Distal end  
Ventral side  
Dorsal side  
Crushed Endosperm 
Cell Layer 
Scutel lar 
epithelial cells 
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
the endosperm cell walls  allowing the whole comple x of proteolytic and amylolytic 
enzymes   to react in conjunction with each other s o that the whole of  the protein 
complex and all the starch are eventually metabolis ed completely to amino acids 
and glucose respectively. Similarly, transport mechanisms are initiated so that these 
metabolites are effectively transferred to the deve loping embryo. During malting 
most of the cell walls are metabolised but only abo ut 40% of the protein and 10% of 
the starch are degraded. By restricting the moistur e levels and terminating the 
modification after 5 or 6 days the amount of rootle t growth , acrospire development 
and respiration loss are minimised whereas in the g rowing plant they are 
maximised. (For fuller details of the endosperm mod ification refer to the unit on 
germination in the malting process 1A.2.3). 
2) The coleoptile (leaf sheath) enclosing the acros pire (the coiled first leaf stem) 
grows along the grain between the aleurone and testa, breaking the husk to emerge 
at the distal grain end. 
3)The first leaf stem then grows through a pore at the tip of the coleoptile,and 
subsequent leaves, each originating at a swollen jo int or node, develop as the stem 
elongates.  Leaves are numbered in order of appeara nce and used as 
developmental markers for the application of field treatments e.g. fertilizers and 
pesticides. 
4) The first node develops into additional adventit ious or coronal roots at the base 
or crown of the plant.   These roots then sustain the plant into maturity. 
5) Apical bud(s) form, and new stems or “tillers” e volve from these (the tillering 
stage), forming a rosette close to the ground.  The  number of tillers that develop is 
variety dependent.  Since only one ear of grain wil l form on each stem this is 
important in terms of yield and kernel size. 
6) The stems elongate prior to flowering, elevating  the ear, which develops at the 
apices of the uppermost leaf sheaths (flag leaf or boot stage).  This phase is known 
as shooting or jointing. 
7) The ear develops upon the rachis.  The rachis is  a differentiated extension of the 
main tiller.  It is here on the rachis that   flowe rs grow into the seeds (barley grains).  
The type of ear produced is determined mainly by th e morphology of the rachis.  A 
rigid strong rachis is required to prevent the ear shattering and breaking during 
maturation and harvesting. 
8) The rachis, like the stem, is divided by nodes w here at each joint  spikelets form.  
Each spikelet has the potential to form a single gr ain.  Every spikelet comprises, 
amongst        other parts, the lemma and palea, wh ich will envelop the flower and 
later form the husk of the mature grain. 
 
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.1.1.2. Barley Fertilization 
Once formed, the spikelet develops its reproductive  organs.  The stamens grow 
anthers which develop and release pollen during ant hesis.  The ovary bears the 
style upon which the stigma rides to receive the pollen. 
Once released from the anther, the pollen grain ger minates on the stigma of the 
translucent embryo sac, to produce a pollen tube.  This pollen tube contains two 
haploid male nuclei (gametes). The pollen tube grow s down from the stigma and 
penetrates the embryo sac.  One of the male nuclei (containing seven 
chromosomes) fuses with the haploid female egg nucl eus, to form the diploid 
embryo or germ containing fourteen chromosomes.  Th e remaining male nucleus 
fuses with the two polar nuclei of the embryo sac t o form a triploid endosperm 
(twenty one chromosomes).  
 
Barley has evolved to be pollinated by neighbouring  plants, their pollen dispersed 
and carried by the wind and insects. However, due t o the close proximity of the 
anthers and stigmas of individual spikelets, self-pollination is most common. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.2.  Internal structure of an unfertilized barley grain. 
 
Broken  awn  Awn  
Lemma  
Anther  
Pollen  grain  
Polar  nuclei  Ovary  
Male nuclei  
Embryo  sac  
Micropyle  
Egg nucleus 
Nucellus  
Stigma 
Ovule 
integuments 
Stamen  
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.1.1.3. Two and Six Rowed Barley 
 
Each individual spikelet (a floret) belongs to a tr iad of florets which, emerge at 
alternating nodes along the rachis.  Each triad com prises one central and two lateral 
spikelets.  The central spikelet is fertile in all barley. 
 
/head2right If only the central spikelet develops into a seed,  one grain per node develops on 
the rachis, giving a two rowed barley ear.   
 
/head2right If all of the six spikelets are fertile and develo p, three grains arise at each node.  
This generates a six rowed barley ear where the lat eral spikelets are skewed either 
side of the symmetrical central spikelet. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ear 
 
 
Spikelet group 
          Spikelet group           Ear 
                            
Two Rowed        
Barley  
    
                                                                    
                                                                   Six Rowed  
                                                                     Barley  
 
 
 
Figure 1.3.  A diagram showing the structure of two and six rowed barley ears and 
individual spikelets. 
Lateral grain in 6 
rowed;sterile 
spikelet 
 in 2 rowed  
Central grain, 
develops from the 
central spikelet in 
both varieties 
Glumes  
Segment 
of Rachis  
Awn(s) 
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Traditionally, European barley has been two rowed; six rowed barley is more commonly 
grown in the Americas.  Two rowed barley varieties produce plumper more symmetrical 
grains than six rowed and as a result, six rowed barleys incur greater losses when 
harvested as smaller grains are screened out.  Over the past thirty years there has been a 
global move towards growing and malting two rowed barleys due to their greater yield per 
hectare. 
 
 
1A.1.1.4. Barley grain development post fertilization 
 
Once fertilized the grain rapidly expands and devel ops into distinctly recognisable 
fractions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.4.  Barley grain development.  
 
 
The endosperm (see Fig 1.6 below ) maturation commences with the outer layer, or 
pericarp of the embryo sac developing chlorophyll.  Next the triploid nucleus divides, the 
origins of the starchy endosperm and aleurone cells . These tissues continue to grow and 
crush the nucellus thus becoming enveloped in the testa (seed coat). 
 
The testa  derived from the inner integument of the ovary and nucellus layer, fuses with the 
ovary wall to form the pericarp (fruit coat).  In t urn the pericarp fuses to the palea and 
lemma forming the husk.  In other cereals the husk does not adhere to the grain which is 
termed naked, e.g. wheat. 
0 50 
Days after fertilization  
Milk 
stage  
Dough 
stage  
Mature 
stage   
Starch 
Protein  
Sucrose 
~ 10 % Grain 
dry weight 
~ 10 -12 % 
Grain dry 
weight 
~ 65 % Grain 
dry weight 
 
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
The aleurone  develops concurrently; the nucleated endosperm cel ls are separated by 
developing cell walls whilst synthesising starch an d accumulating protein. The outermost 
layer differentiates into aleurone cells, which do not produce starch. Cell separation by cell 
walls and aleurone cell development is completed af ter five to six days.  The whole 
process of cell division is complete approximately 30 days after anthesis whilst starch 
production continues for a total of around 55 days.   Approximate times can only be given 
due the differences between barley varieties and th e distinct climates in which they are 
grown. 
 
The embryo  development lags behind that of the endosperm, but  by approximately 40 
days most synthesis is complete.Once the grain begi ns to swell due to the transfer of 
photosynthesised sugar, starch is laid down in the developing kernel. This process can be 
used as a marker of grain development as depicted in Fig. 1.4.  
 
At the end of the “milk” stage sufficient starch ha s been synthesised so that the squeezed 
grain exudes an opaque milky liquid. As more starch  is deposited the “milk” changes to a 
soft “dough” which hardens as the moisture content decreases to around 14% in fully 
matured grain.  
 
 
The initial stages of this development are summarised in Fig 1.5 below. 
9 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 1.5 Barley grain development 
Endosperer 
Embryo 
Triploid nucleus  
Diploid nucleus  
Division of triploid cell into many nuclei 
Cell wall development, cell separation & starch granule production 
Cell division & aleurone layer complete 
2 / 3 days post 
fertilisation 
4 / 5 
days  
5 / 6 days  
Starch 
granule 
Protein 
matrix  
Aleurone 
layer 

10 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
1A.1.1.5. The structure of the barley grain 
The morphological structure of the mature barley kernel differs only slightly between 
varieties.  The distinct sections of the grain prov ide individual functions, which act in 
synergy to achieve germination.  The maltster must manipulate this combined 
action to generate the highest quality malt.  In order to do this they must understand 
the physiology of the grain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.6  Endosperm structure of barley.    
 
 
(a) The Husk 
 
The husk is divided into two: 
 
/head2right The upper dorsal half covering the embryo (the lem ma). 
/head2right The lower ventral half (the palea). 
 
The lemma usually extends into the serrated awn, an d together with other 
morphological characteristics (husk pigmentation, r oughness) is often used in varietal 
identification.  The husk accounts on average for 10% of the dry weight of the grain and 
as such “naked” cereals (such as wheat) will provid e comparatively 10% more extract 
than barley. 
 
Le mma  
Palea  
Pericarp  
Testa 
Aleurone  
Ventral 
furrow 
Cells of 
ventral 
endosperm  
Cells of dorsal 
endosperm 
Cells of  
sub-aleurone 
Husk  
Endosperm cell 
walls 
Protein 
matrix  
Large A-Type Starch 
granules 
(10-25 µ m) Small, B-Type 
Starch granules 
         (1 -5µ m)  
11 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Comprised mainly of cellulose and silica, the husk has a multi-layered structure.  The 
outer epidermal cells are cuticularised, below whic h thick-walled cells (which provide 
rigidity) lie on top of thinner cells adjoining the  pericarp.  Throughout malting the husk 
aids hydration and hinders dehydration of the grain .  In the brewhouse the husk is an 
essential grist component acting as a microfilter d uring wort separation (in the lauter 
tun system). 
 
Maltsters suggest that de-husked or partly de-huske d barley, resulting from mechanical 
damage during harvesting and storage, should be rej ected.  If left, uneven germination 
will yield poor quality malt, and lead to brewhouse  problems (poor filtration, haze 
potential). 
 
The husk can harbour fungal and bacterial populatio ns.  If excessive quantities are 
present they compete with the grain for oxygen duri ng germination.  This can cause a 
type of dormancy  known as water sensitivity .  Some microbial contaminants are 
toxic and demand that safety precautions be adminis tered.  For example, Aspergillus  
species produce toxigenic spores and mycotoxins whi ch if inhaled cause respiratory 
diseases such as malt-worker’s lung (allergic alveo litis).  Other fungi are known to be 
linked to the phenomena of beer gushing ( Fusarium  species). 
 
  Figure 1.7. The covering layers of the barley grain. 
Husk  
Pericarp  
Testa 
Aleurone 
layer  
Cuticle  
Endosperm 
Starch granules Protein   matrix  Cell walls  
12 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
(b) The Pericarp 
 
Fruits comprise a pericarp and testa; seeds only ha ve the testa.  Cereals comprise 
both layers and as such are dry (indehiscent) fruit s, called caryopses.  The pericarp 
is a very thin layer (0.5 mm) accounting for only 1 % of the total grain weight.  The 
uppermost cuticular, epidermal cells of the pericarp are attached to the inner husk. 
  
Below the cuticular layer lies the main layer of cr ushed “woody” cell wall material 
(cellulose) and inner layers of tube-cells and cros s-cells.  In barley, the cross-cells 
are two or three layers thick whilst in other cerea ls (wheat, rye, rice and oats) they 
are only one cell deep. 
The pericarp is a semi-permeable layer, which restr icts water absorption and helps 
prevent grain rot.  In addition, the pericarp is impervious to CO 2 and gibberellic acid, 
which can only gain entry through the mycropylar re gion.  By selectively damaging 
(abrading) the husk and pericarp, the permeability of the grain to water can be 
increased and when combined with gibberellic acid a ddition, this can shorten the 
malting process by two days. 
 
(c) The Testa 
 
The testa is the thinnest of all the barley layers,  compressed to a lesser extent over 
the embryo than the remaining endosperm.  Composed of two cuticular (lipid) 
layers, occasionally, some crushed cellular materia l can be found between the two 
layers.  The testa is permeable to gibberellic acid , but prevents the outward 
diffusion of amino acids, sugars and other low mole cular weight nutritional 
components from the grain interior. 
 
 
(d) The Aleurone layer 
 
Situated below the testa and above the starchy endo sperm the aleurone layer 
extends throughout the grain.  Barley aleurone layers are three cells deep, but often 
reduced to only one cell in the embryonic region.  In contrast, the aleurone layers of 
cereals such as wheat, oats, rye, millet, maize and  rice are more commonly only 
one cell thick.  The aleurone consists of cubical, thick walled, respiring, starch free 
cells, and accounts for approximately 10% of grain weight.  Most importantly the 
aleurone layer is responsible for synthesising and releasing hydrolytic reducing 
enzymes into the endosperm.  These enzymes degrade and convert the starch 
during germination and later during mashing. 
 
 
(e) The Endosperm 
 
The endosperm, lying below the aleurone, is the den sely packed main tissue of the 
mature grain; “its food store”.  The dead and  
non-respiring tissue comprises thin walled cells, c ontaining starch granules 
embedded in a protein matrix.  Within the endosperm  cells are small air-filled or 
“water free” spaces, entrapped in the protein matri x. 
13 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
If the endosperm cells contain a high percentage of  such spaces, the grain in 
section appears opaque and white and is described as mealy . 
2. If the proportion of air spaces is low and the p rotein matrix is dense, the grain 
appears       translucent and gray, described as steely . 
The mealiness and steeliness of the grain is import ant in malting.  Mealy grains 
permit a more rapid and even pattern of hydration, and therefore, better endosperm 
modification compared with steely grains.  This results in superior quality malt. 
 
 
(f) The Embryo 
 
The quiescent embryo comprises the axis and scutell um.  The axis consists of the 
first leaves encased in the coleoptile (leaf sheath ), and the rootlet initials 
encapsulated by the coleorhiza (root sheath).  The axis is attached to the scutellum. 
The embryo is important as it produces plant growth regulators or 
hormones (gibberellins).  Gibberellins are transported to the aleurone and stimulate 
the production, and release of endosperm degrading enzymes from the aleurone 
layer, at the onset of germination. 
 
 
 
 
1A.1.1.6. Composition of Cereal Grains  
 
Table 1  Overall composition of the barley grain 
 
Component Content (% dry weight) 
Starch 60-64 
Arabinoxylans 4.4-7.8 
β -Glucans 3.6-6.1 
Cellulose 1.4-5.0 
Simple carbohydrates 
(glucose, fructose, sucrose, maltose) 0.41-2.9 
Oligosaccharides 
(raffinose, fructosans) 0.16-1.8 
Proteins 8-15 
Lipids 2-3 
Minerals 2-3 
 
14 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
(a) The Husk 
 
As previously described, the husk’s main structural components include 
 
/head2right Lignin. 
/head2right Silica. 
/head2right Cellulosic material. 
 
 
Other chemical components include: 
 
/head2right Pentosans and sugars.  Xylose and arabinose accoun t for approximately 5% of the 
total grain pentosan.  
 
/head2right The polysaccharide β -Glucan, proliferates throughout the grain.   
 
/head2right Phenolic material.  Some of these phenols leach ou t of the husk during steeping 
and can give beer an astringent flavour.   
 
 
(b) The Pericarp and Testa 
 
Both layers contain phenolic material, but this pla ys only a minor role in malting..  The 
testa has insignificant quantities of lipid materia l compared to other structures within 
the grain. 
 
 
(c) The Aleurone Layer 
 
The aleurone cells contain a host of differing compounds: 
 
/head2right Lipids (30%). 
/head2right Protein (20%). 
/head2right Phytic acid. 
/head2right Pentosan-cellulose. 
/head2right Minerals. 
/head2right Sucrose.  
/head2right B-group vitamins (important as yeast growth factor s). 
 
The aleurone cell walls are composed of pentosans (66%) and β  -glucans (28%).  
Within the cells are sub-cellular bodies (aleurone grains).  These contain the 
carbohydrate materials, phytic acid and protein tha t are consumed during synthesis of 
the endosperm degrading enzymes. 
 
15 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
The aleurone cells are inter-connected by plasmodesmata . These are channels that 
allow the passage of cellular material between cells.   
The most important function of the aleurone layer i s enzyme synthesis.  The aleurone 
is known to synthesise the following enzymes de novo: 
 
/head2right α -amylase 
/head2right Limit dextrinase 
/head2right Endo protease 
 
The aleurone may also produce the following enzymes .  However, it has not been 
established as to whether the aleurone layer synthe sises the enzymes de novo or 
simply activates them: 
 
/head2right Endo β -1,3 : 1,4 glucanase 
/head2right Endo β -1,3 glucanase 
/head2right Phytase 
/head2right Lipase 
/head2right Pentosanase 
 
 
(d) The Endosperm 
 
The main components of the endosperm are the starch  granules and encapsulating 
protein matrix. The starch granules adopt two forms: 
 
/head2right Large A type granules (10 – 25 µ m) 
/head2right Small B type granules (1 – 5 µ m) 
 
The starch granules are produced from sucrose , supplied from the photosynthetic 
tissue of the grain.  On forming, the granules embo dy two glucose polymers, 
amylopectin (75 -80%) and amylose (20-25%).   
 
The large A-type only constitute 10% of the total n umber of starch granules, but 
account for 90% (by weight) of the total starch. 
 
The next major component of the endosperm is the pr otein matrix.  There are four 
fractions of barley protein embodied within the gra in defined by their extraction 
requirements: 
 
(i)Albumin  is found in the aleurone and accounts for approxim ately 4% of total 
grain protein.  After digestion its component amino  acids are utilised in the 
synthesis of α -amylase.   
 
16 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
(ii)Globulin , accounting for approximately 31% total grain prot ein is also utilised in 
enzyme production. Present in the aleurone, but mai nlyconcentrated in the 
endosperm protein matrix, it is thought to play a r ole in the assimilation of the 
zymogens, carboxypeptidase and β -amylase.  
 
(iii) Glutelin , a storage protein is found in the endosperm and c ontains large 
proportions of the amino acids proline and glutamin e, which  provide part of the 
yeast’s nutritional complement in wort. 
(iv) Hordein  is the most important protein present in barley, f or high levels restrict 
endosperm modification.  Found in the endosperm as a storage protein, it is closely 
associated with the starch granules.  Hordein is a prolamin with high levels of 
proline and glutamine (again yeast nutritional comp onents).  It forms approximately 
36% of total grain protein.  There are four fractio ns of hordein protein classified by 
molecular weight: 
 
/head2right A Hordein , the smallest group (MW <25,000). 
 
/head2right B Hordein , rich in sulphur and accounts for  
     80-90% of hordein. This protein forms close associations with the starch 
granules through disulphide bridges.      Also inhibits β -amylase action (MW 
35,000 - 46,000). 
 
/head2right C Hordein , sulphur deficient accounting for 10-20% total hor dein 
protein (MW 59,000-72,000). 
 
/head2right D Hordein , accounts for less than 5% of hordein, similar to B 
hordein but contains more disulphide linked polypeptides (MW ~ 90,000).  
 
 
Excessive use of fertilsers during barley growth pr oduces high levels of hordein .  
High levels of storage protein also result in lower  starch contents.  This is in harmony 
with the regularity principle  
 
 
 
 
The outer cell walls contain β -glucan (70%), pentosan (20%) and protein (5%).  Th e 
enzymes present in the endosperm include carboxypeptidases and β -amylase. 
17 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1.8a         Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of low protein barley endosperm 
Note large and small starch granules, cell walls an d absence of 
protein matrix compared with Fig 1.8b. 
18 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1.8b    SEM of high protein barley  showing large starch  granules embedded in 
protein matrix which also envelopes the small starch granules. 
 
 
For further detail and legend refer to Fig 1.8c below 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure1.8c  Starchy endosperm cells 
Protein 
mid dle 
lamella 
Outer wall  
(ββ ββ  glucan and 
pentosan)  
Inner cell wall 
 ( ββ ββ  glucan)  
Starch 
granules 
Protein 
matrix 
19 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
(e) The Embryo 
  
At morphological maturity the embryo is approximate ly 3-4% total dry weight of the 
grain.  The embryo consists of: 
 
/head2right ~25% lipids 
/head2right ~10% storage protein 
/head2right ~10% sucrose 
/head2right ~2% raffinose 
/head2right B-group vitamins  
    
 
Lipases from the aleurone degrade the lipid materia l, and the unsaturated fatty 
acids (e.g. oleic and linoleic acid)  so produced a re important yeast nutrients and as 
components of flavour compounds in spirit. 
20 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.1.2 Environmental and Agronomic Factors Influenc ing the 
Growth of  Barley 
 
 1A.1.2.1. Climate 
 
Barley, along with oats and rye, is regarded as a “ coarse grain” in terms of the 
overall agronomy of cereals. The prime cereals (whe at and maize) predominate the 
worldwide acreage devoted to the cultivation of gra in. Barley is therefore grown in 
cool temperate climates in the northern states of U SA, in Canada and northern 
Europe in the Northern Hemisphere. In the Southern Hemisphere barley is 
principally grown in Australia and New Zealand and some in the high veldt of South 
Africa. 
Barley  like other cereals , benefits from a regula r supply of moisture to the root 
system. Spring barley provides the highest yields i n countries with regular summer 
rain e.g. maritime countries such as UK, Denmark an d S.W. France and New 
Zealand. Since grain yield is dependant on photosyn thesis, long daylight with warm 
sunshine is essential  
so that slow ripening produces the highest carbohyd rate accumulation. Such 
conditions result in soil temperatures  in the rang e >5 0C and <20 0C which are the 
optimum.  
  
 
1A.1.2.2. Soil 
 
The soil ecosystem should be balanced so that exces ses of artificial fertilization, 
pesticide and herbicide  applications  do not alter  the soil environment unduly . 
Good surface tillage of soil of pH 6.0 to 6.5, to a depth of 25cm, is ideal  in providing 
the perfect environment for cereal root exploitatio n. Barley root systems can 
penetrate the soil to a depth of >2metres but  80% of the roots are in the cultivated 
zone. Soil of higher pH is unsuitable for barley or  wheat but oats are more tolerant 
of slightly acidic conditions. On chalky soils with  a pH above 6.5 trace element 
availability can be impaired  leading to plant defi ciency disorders. Soil pH  is 
therefore an important  influence on the availabili ty of most other nutrients and 
generally  availability decreases with increasing acidity. 
 
 
1A.1.2.3. Soil Nutrients   
 
Ideally, all the cereal plant’s nutrient requiremen ts can be provided from soil in 
which sufficient organic material has been incorpor ated e.g. by ploughing in a 
previous crop of grass and clover. However intense cereal farming with no crop 
rotation requires careful management. The following  table shows the nutrient 
removal (kg/ha) for a 10tonne/ha yield of winter wheat : 
 
Nitrogen (N)  170 
Phosphate (P) 70 
Potash (K)  55 
Calcium  5 
Magnesium  10 
Sulphur  34 
21 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Manganese  0.13 
Boron   0.01 
Molybdenum  0.003 
Copper  0.002 
Zinc   0.2 
 
The first three nutrients listed are the main eleme nts which have to be 
supplemented by the appropriate N/P/K ratio of fert ilizer both at sowing and at the 
appropriate growth stages.  
The amount of nitrogen required for spring barley i s dependant on the inherent 
status of the soil.  The base for low status fields  is 130 kg/ha but this is reduced to 
90 units for moderate and 50 units for high status ground.  
If the seedbed has a high status from organic matter the slow break down of this will 
lead to a higher nitrogen content in the grain.  
For malting barley, all nitrogen should therefore b e applied before the start of 
tillering, otherwise grain nitrogen is increased. B ecause of intense farming much of 
the applied nitrogen has been wasted in the past an d has now increased nitrate 
levels in many aquifers throughout Europe. Areas su ch as Jutland in Denmark and 
many parts of the UK are now designated as being ni trogen sensitive and strict 
controls on further nitrogen applications are applied.  
This means that crop yields are lower but the malts ter benefits by procuring 
consistently low nitrogen levels in barley. Yield o f spring barley is closely related to 
ear count which is dependant on good sowing conditions and sufficient nitrogen.  
 
The seed should be sown as early as possible and the nitrogen application split with 
some in the seedbed and the balance soon after brai rding.  The optimum 
fertilization is to make the first application with  a N/P/K ratio of 1:1:1 and to top up 
with straight nitrogen rather than the traditional application of 2:1:1 all in the 
seedbed. 
 
 
1A.1.2.4.Crop competitors – weeds, pests and diseas es 
 
The effect of weeds on crop yield depends on which weeds are present, how many 
there are and the relative size of the crop and the  weed population. It may therefore 
be uneconomic to apply specific weed controls if th e  weed population is tolerable 
and is non-competitive. However there are some weed s that become persistent in 
later years if not controlled at an early stage. In  Scotland for example control of 
blackgrass, couch grass  and wild oats is essential . The most competitive weeds 
will vary from area to area and from country to country.   
 
Pests  ( e.g. weevils mites and beetles) which cons ume  cereal seeds have to be 
controlled by application of approved pesticides. S imilarly aphids which act as 
vectors in the spread of viral diseases must be eliminated from the crop.  
 
Fungal diseases can be the most deleterious to crop  yield. In particular mildew, 
loose smut and the various forms of rust can all ha ve a drastic effect on the 
eventual crop. Furthermore, farmers must be diligen t in preventing infection by 
those fungi which can be harmful to humans. 
22 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Aspergillus can cause “farmers’ lung” and certain s pecies of fusarium can deposit 
mycotoxins on the grain. Although these toxic materials will not contaminate distilled 
spirit they could cause harm to malting and distill ing plant operators. Similarly ergot 
on wheat can be deadly poisonous if it is allowed t o contaminate bread flour but 
would not be harmful in a grain distillery unless d ust from a mill or grist conveyor 
was contaminated and accidentally inhaled by a plant operator. 
 
Fungal diseases can however be controlled by sprayi ng the crop with an approved 
chemical fungicide. With increasing concern over the effect that spray drift can have 
on the adjacent environment, chemicals have to be s tringently assessed before 
approval is given by  environment control institutions.  
This makes approved chemicals very expensive and fa rmers have to evaluate any 
crop yield benefit before committing to their use. A better route for all concerned is 
for farmers to sow varieties which have high natural disease resistance.  
The down side of this policy is that plant fungi mu tate very quickly and within a few 
years they can overcome the plant’s inherent disease resistance.  
This in turn shortens the viable lifetime of many good cereal cultivars. 
23 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.1.3 Harvesting and Storage of Barley 
 
 1A.1.3.1. Harvesting moistures 
  
Maximum yields of grain dry matter occur when the m oisture content is above 25%. 
As the grain matures and the plant senesces the moi sture content rapidly drops to 
between 14 and 16%. This will vary from area to are a dependant on climate and 
weather and may be higher in wetter maritime climat es. However at higher moisture 
levels (16 – 25%) the grain is more difficult to co mbine harvest and the germ can be 
damaged by over threshing. Also at 16% grain can on ly be stored for a maximum of 
4 weeks before its quality deteriorates by fungal a nd microbial infection. On farm 
storage at moistures above 16% is at much higher ri sk and must be uplifted to 
drying plant as soon as possible. If undried barley  has to be held for even a few 
days, the grain should be aerated as much as possib le to avoid grain respiration 
and consequent overheating prior to drying down to 12% for long term storage. 
Even at relatively low moistures (14 -16%) dormant grain still has some metabolic 
turnover and there can be some heat generating resp iration. In warmer drier 
climates grain can be safely harvested and stored f or longer periods if the grain 
moisture does not exceed 14%.  However a maximum st orage of 6-9 months in 
aerated silos is the maximum period even at these r elatively low moistures. For 
longer periods of storage the recommended maximum moisture is 12-13%.  
 
 
 
1A.1.3.2. Barley drying 
 
The wetter barley is at harvest the greater it is a t risk to microbial spoilage and 
heating. Similarly wetter barley can be damaged mor e easily by overheating in 
barley drying and the maximum safe temperature of t he drying air must be reduced 
accordingly. For malting barley below 24% moisture the safe maximum drying air 
temperature is 49 0C and for moistures above 24% the max. is 43 0C . 
The gentlest drying can be effected by drying in ba tch kilns (50 – 500 tonnes 
capacity) with high even air flows (20 – 30 m 3/min/tonne). Since residence time in 
malt kilns can be up to 12 hours per batch their us e for barley drying inevitably 
reduces annual malting capacity. However some malts ters believe that kiln dried 
barley recovers from dormancy quicker and more even ly than that from continuous 
driers because the grain is warmer (about 30 0C) on transfer to silo where it can then 
be slowly cooled to ambient temperatures for long term storage. 
In cross-flow continuous driers higher air-on tempe ratures can be tolerated (60 – 
65 0C) but because of the latent heat of evaporation an d the faster drying rates the 
grain temperature rarely exceeds 25 0C at the lower stages and because most tower 
driers of this type have a final cooling stage, bar ley being transferred to silo does 
not benefit from the same degree of warm conditioning. 
Both types of drier benefit from grain pre-cleaners  which can remove weed seeds, 
trash and other harvest detritus, all of which can impede drying rates. On receipt at 
the drying plant each load (ca 20 tonnes) of barley  is checked for screening levels 
and moisture content before committing to well vent ilated intake silos for interim 
buffer storage prior to drying. It may be necessary  to have a number of intake bins 
available so that discrete batches of different var ieties or grades of barley can be 
assembled.  
24 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
1A.1.3.3. Barley storage 
 
Suitable storage for dried barley ranges from simpl e flat floored sheds (10 – 50,000 
t. capacity)  with on floor aeration tubes to large complexes of concrete or steel silos 
with individual self emptying and aeration systems. If the barley is required  for early 
malting ( Sept. – Oct. in N. Europe) and has been g rown in a cool moist  climate 
such as northern Scotland  then the barley is norma lly stored under warm 
conditions (20 – 25 0C) before being gradually cooled to ambient tempera tures (10 – 
15 0C) by blowing ambient air at a rate of up to 10m 3/hour/tonne. The warm 
conditioning of such barley ensures a quick and eve n recovery from dormancy. (for 
details on control of dormancy see 1A.1.4 below).  Generally speaking, the cooler 
and wetter barley is at harvest the more it is pron e to dormancy (although the main 
influence is barley variety).  
 
In warmer drier climates where barley is normally h arvested at 13-14% moisture 
very little drying is required except for long term  storage.  In these conditions 
dormancy does not usually present a problem even wi th varieties which are 
genetically more prone to this condition and can be  malted within 8 weeks of 
harvest. It helps that the grain is naturally warm in silo but this can create another 
problem when attempting to cool the barley to preve nt infestation from insects and 
mites. Under extreme conditions cooling air may hav e to be refrigerated to extract 
heat from the bulked grain. Now that prophylactic a dditions of pesticides such as 
DDT are banned, cooling is the only effective way t o prevent infestation since most 
insects are moribund at temperatures of 10 – 15 0C 
 
 
         1A.1.4 Dormancy 
1A.1.4.1. Reasons for Dormancy 
 
Dormancy is the state where living grains will not germinate under conditions that 
would normally be regarded as favourable. As a cult ivated crop, dormancy in barley 
is atypical of the truly natural situation as varie ties have been selected over the 
years on the basis of a number of traits including dormancy.  However this 
dormancy is both varietal and seasonal and some dor mancy is desirable to avoid or 
limit the extent of pre-germination in the ear.   
 
Conversely, excessive dormancy is to be avoided sin ce this extends the period that 
grain must be maintained in storage prior to maltin g and so raises the cost base.  
Apart from cost, dormancy does not relate to maltin g quality and indeed several 
high quality varieties of malting barley have shown  a tendency to dormancy (for 
example Triumph).  Dormancy is dependent on growing  conditions with grains 
harvested in the more northerly latitudes of the Un ited Kingdom showing greater 
dormancy. 
 
Climatic conditions during pre-harvest ripening app ears to be particularly important 
in terms of dormancy with hot, dry weather tending to lower future dormancy 
characteristics with cool, damp, dull weather having the reverse effect. 
 
25 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.1.4.2. Mechanism of Dormancy  
The fundamental cause and control of dormancy in se eds is poorly understood and 
many hypotheses have been put forward that indicate  that there are a number of 
different control mechanisms.  Various theories hav e been advanced to explain 
dormancy and these have been built around experimen tal observations such as 
those outlined in the following text. 
 
 1A.1.4.3. Barrier Effects of Seed Coats 
These effects may be due to physical or chemical ch aracteristics of the seed coats 
as well as change in the permeability of the coveri ng layers of the grain to water, 
solutes or gases.  Examples of these effects include: 
 
/head2right Lettuce - where the coat imposes a physical constr aint and dormancy release is 
determined by the balance of the expansive force of  the embryo and the 
strength of the coat. 
 
/head2right Wild oat - the seed coat restricts oxygen supply t o the embryo and so limits 
germination. 
 
 
1A.1.4.4. Effects of Light on Dormancy 
Light is implicated in the release of dormancy of m any seeds.  Work in the 1930's 
established that light at wavelengths  630 - 680 nm  promoted germination whilst 
wavelengths of 730 - 750 nm were inhibitory.  This effect was later associated with 
a photoreceptor pigment that was called phytochrome  that could exist in two 
interconvertable forms, Pr and Pfr (the germination  promoting form) and that this 
interconversion was dependent on the wavelength of light to which the phytochrome 
was exposed. 
Seeds of lettuce and cucumber are included amongst the many seeds where this 
effect has been shown to occur.  
 
 
1A.1.4.5. Presence and Absence of Inhibitors 
 
 Germination and growth inhibitors have been isolat ed from seed pericarp, testa, 
endosperm and embryo.  The nature of these inhibito ry materials varies and 
prominent examples include phenolic compounds and t he plant growth regulator 
Abscisic Acid (ABA). 
 
 
1A.1.4.6. Shifts in Oxidative Pathways 
The theory that the operation of alternative respir ation pathways may play a role in 
triggering dormancy release was largely developed f rom the observations that 
chemicals such as nitrite and methylene blue could serve to release dormancy in 
seeds of barley and rice.  These chemicals were als o observed to stimulate the 
operation of the pentose phosphate pathway.  This h ypothesis proposed that 
operation of the pentose phosphate pathway was involved in dormancy release. 
 
 
26 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.1.4.7. Genetic Controls 
In reviewing genetic control it is difficult to dif ferentiate between cause and effect.  
For example, reference has already been made to the  ability of GA to promote α-
amylase production as part of the mobilisation proc ess but this is certainly not the 
initial trigger for germination.   
 
Much of current thinking has supposed that dormancy  represents a lack of some 
essential component or components of the germinatio n mechanism and that this 
initial trigger will be reflected as the initiation  of expression of specific genes.  
However, recent work on the wheat has suggested the  reverse, namely that the 
expression of certain genes was maintained in the d ormant grain but not in the non-
dormant grain.  This has lead to the proposal that dormancy requires the expression 
of a gene whose product actually prevents the completion of the germination.  
  
From the above, it is evident that there are many q uestions still to answer and the 
various theories may  not be mutually exclusive.  F or example, links have been 
demonstrated between phytochrome and the pentose ph osphate pathway, so it is 
possible that there is no single trigger responsibl e for dormancy release either 
within or between varieties and species.  
 
Observations made on barley have suggested that the following factors are  
involved: 
 
/head2right embryo maturity - mature embryos can germinate at lower oxygen levels. 
 
/head2right aleurone maturity - aleurone is potentially more r esponsive in non-dormant 
tissue. 
 
/head2right availability of oxygen to living tissues - this ma y be restricted by the 
husk/pericarp, ambient oxygen concentrations in sur rounding water films or 
competition from surface microflora 
 
/head2right undefined grain inhibitors 
 
 
1A.1.4.8. Overcoming Dormancy 
 
Maltsters employ a number of techniques to limit an y adverse effects arising from 
dormancy. These include: 
 
/head2right Selection of barley  - varieties that show minimal dormancy are preferr ed 
and identified at the earliest stage of the breedin g process.  This limits the 
availability of varieties with higher dormancy char acteristics in the market place.  A 
second approach is to be particularly selective whe n purchasing barley from areas 
where climate may favour dormancy. 
 
/head2right Drying barley  on receipt  and running into storage warm.  This is an 
established procedure for reducing dormancy but nee ds to be balanced against the 
risks of heat damage on drying and insect infestation on storage. . 
27 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
It should be noted that for barley intended for dis tilling malt, exogenous chemical 
treatments such as steep additives (hydrogen peroxi de lime etc.) and the use of 
exogenous GA are either discouraged or banned (e.g.  in Scotland). This can be a 
severe handicap to maltsters who could thereby impr ove the quality of malt made 
from barley with sluggish germinability. In such ba rley GA synthesis is impaired and 
therefore malt modification is slow and incomplete.  The application of exogenous 
GA to supplement poor natural synthesis could bring  the barley back to normal 
levels and to expected malting quality. 
 
 
1A.1.4.9. Types of Dormancy 
 
Some attempts have been made to classify dormancy into varying types as a tool to 
gain an understanding of the underlying mechanisms and controls.  One such 
classification is as follows: 
 
/head2right Innate  dormancy  – variously referred to as primary, genetic, spont aneous or 
embryo dormancy.  This is where the cause of dorman cy lies within the grain itself 
and, as noted above, is a characteristic of that variety. 
 
/head2right Enforced or imposed  dormancy  is caused when the external conditions 
are unfavourable and growth recommences as soon as the adverse conditions are 
removed. 
 
/head2right Induced or secondary dormancy  – this occurs when grain is held under 
conditions unfavourable to germination but remain d ormant for some period after 
the unfavourable conditions are withdrawn.  An exam ple of this is that grain 
harvested promptly after a warm dry spell will gemi nate more readily than similar 
grain that has been harvested later after a delay caused by rain and high humidity. 
 
/head2right Harvest dormancy  or after ripening  – this refers to the fact that the 
maltability of the grain changes during storage eve n though there is little change in 
the apparent germination which is close to 100%.  I n the UK most maltsters would 
expect grain to be sufficiently suitable for maltin g some 6-8 weeks post harvest, for 
its maltability to continue to improve.   
 
 
 
 
28 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.1.5.  Water Sensitivity 
During steeping, husk and grain consituents are lea ched out into the steep liquor.  
These materials include amino acids, pentose and he xose sugars, carboxylic acids 
and phenolic compounds.  All of the above compounds  are used by microbial 
populations within the steep to support their own g rowth.  The result, is a microbial 
community that competes for the same oxygen as the barley grain.  If left 
unchecked, these microorganisms will deprive the gr ain of oxygen which can cause 
“water sensitive” barley to germinate unevenly.  By  exposing the grain to air, water 
sensitivity is avoided, as the grain is supplied with sufficient oxygen for respiration. 
 
Water sensitivity can also be induced by continuall y steeping the grain; in effect 
drowning the grain.  Therefore, introducing air to the grain mass (an “air rest”) 
prevents the halt of grain respiration and allows c ontinued grain development.  This 
and overcoming microbial competition for oxygen are  the most important reasons 
for air resting the barley.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.1.6.  Principles of Barley Breeding and Selection for Malting 
 
  Introduction 
 
Brewers and distillers purchase around 90% of malt produced.  Therefore, maltsters 
need to be aware of the qualities that brewing and distilling varieties of barley must 
possess.   
Cereal breeding has taken place for decades with th e aim of improving existing 
plant characteristics.  
In terms of malting barley such goals have included: 
 
/head2right Greater yield per hectare. 
 
/head2right Shorter and more rigid straw which is resistant to  breaking or “lodging”. 
 
/head2right Ears that do not shatter, and therefore, more suit ed to mechanical 
harvesting. 
 
/head2right Enhanced disease resistance. 
 
/head2right Improved grain uniformity/ homogeneity. 
 
/head2right Enhanced extract potential. 
 
/head2right Ease of malting and malt yield. 
 
All of the above criteria are common to both brewer s and distillers. However the 
discovery of the known carcinogen ethyl carbamate i n distilled products has led to 
the requirement to eliminate its precursors from ma lted barley.  The specific 
compound leading to the formation of ethyl carbamat e during the distilling process 
is a naturally occurring cyanogenic glycoside, epih eterodendrin which is located in 
the acrospires of some malting barley. To ensure th e final spirit has an acceptably 
low concentration of ethyl carbamate distilling bar ley varieties are now selected on 
the basis of low levels of the epiheterodendrin precursor. 
 
 
1A.1.6.1. Traditional Barley Breeding 
 
Traditionally barley breeding has involved the selection and crossing of varieties.  
Barley, as a self-pollinating crop produces genetically identical offspring.  Breeders 
introduce variety by preventing  
self-pollination (removing the anthers) and then fertilising the plant with pollen from 
another.  Superior plants from the progeny are then selected and allowed to grow 
and pollinate naturally.  For example the variety Proctor was created in this manner. 
In the simplest cases two parent barley varieties are crossed, seed is harvested and 
grown normally. The first (F1) generation grown fro m the cross, which contains 
chromosomes with genes from both parents, is said t o be heterozygous and does 
not breed true. 
30 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Successive generations become more homozygous (purer) and selections are 
made initially for the first three or four generati ons on visual appearance and 
disease resistance. Occasionally backcrossing is employed where the F1 
generation is immediately recrossed to one of the p arents. Alternatively, multiple 
crosses may be carried out where two F1 generations  with different parents are 
crossed. 
 
Various techniques have been developed to shorten the time taken between the 
initial cross and the production of a pure strain. The earliest method was to grow 
spring barley crosses in New Zealand during the UK winter and thus obtain two 
generations within a year.  
 
Newer techniques involve producing haploid plants with half the normal number of 
chromosomes, treating them with a chemical (colchicine) which induces 
chromosome doubling, resulting in a diploid (normal chromosome number) 
homozygous plant. The haploid plants can be produced either by tissue culturing 
pollen from the F1 generation or by crossing the F1 generation with a wild barley 
Hordeum bulbosum. In the latter case, the chromosomes from Hordeum bulbosum 
are lost during division, resulting in a haploid plant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.15  Crossing of barley varieties to produce a new cultivar. 
 
 
Maris otter is another variety generated through repeated hybridisation. 
 
This method of cereal development is not as simple as may first seem.  From initial 
hybridisation, to final release of the new cultivar  into the market place takes a 
staggering ten years of rigorous trials and testing.   
 
Following the initial cross, the seed is grown eith er in the field or in growth 
chambers.  From these, certain selected plants (the F2 generation) are again grown  
S PRAT A RCHER  X  
S PRAT PLUMAGE  
Plumage  Archer  x  Kenia  
Proctor  
31 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
out and the cycle continued.  For a viable program to continue the new strain should 
show improvements in yield, malt quality and diseas e resistance by the third 
generation.   
 
Potential new varieties must then pass through micr o-malting and brewing trials 
before full plant trials prior to trade acceptance. 
 
1A.1.6.2. Mutations 
 
Alternative methods of plant breeding have involved  producing induced mutations 
or have examined naturally occurring ones.  However , many mutations are 
deleterious and many otherwise desirable mutations have associated 
characteristics that make them undesirable.  Exampl es of mutated barley that has 
been successful or have created interest are Golden  Promise (gamma-ray mutant 
of Maythorpe) and Glacier, a natural mutant of an A merican six-row barley.  Glacier 
had 40% amylose in its starch instead of the normal 20%.   
 
1A.1.6.3. Acceptance of New Barley Varieties 
 
Before the new cultivar can be recognised and recom mended by national regulatory 
body’s (e.g. National Institute of Agricultural Botany in the UK, or The Malting Barley 
Research Institute in Canada) it must first be seen  to show distinctiveness, 
uniformity and stability.  This is known as the D.U.S. test and this test can take up to 
three years to complete. 
 
DUS is the acronym for: 
 
/head2right Distinctiveness - that a variety is in some way distinct from other varieties. 
 
/head2right Uniformity  - that a variety is not a mixture. 
 
/head2right Stability  – that the variety will remain the same over the t rail period, i.e. it will  
       not out-pollinate.                   
 
 
After each challenge has been accomplished is it su rprising to note that less than 
one in every 100,000 crossed offspring make it to variety status. 
 
 
1A.1.6.4. Breeding Assisted by Molecular Biology Techniques 
 
Traditional barley breeding is very labour intensiv e since all of the progenies 
produced have to be tested to verify the presence o f various phenotypes, for 
example virus resistance.  When a parent, resistant  to a virus, is crossed with a 
parent susceptible to the virus, the progeny must b e tested to establish whether this 
resistance has been passed down.  In order to do th is, leaves of the offspring are 
infected with the virus and resistance monitored.  This virus is usually modified so 
that it can not systemically infect neighbouring pl ants to prevent the spread of the 
virus throughout the whole test field.  Some viruse s are only transmitted via aphids, 
which can complicate testing considerably. 
32 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
Molecular biological techniques have now made it po ssible to identify DNA 
sequences that are directly linked to the DNA compo nent conferring resistance.  
Molecular markers are defined as a difference in DN A sequences (polymorphisms) 
that occur between different individuals of the sam e species.  These DNA 
polymorphisms can be rapidly identified by various molecular biological techniques.  
Resistance to certain viruses can now be detected b y an automated Simple 
Sequence Length Polymorphism (SSLP)  within a day. 
 
 
 
KEYPOINT:  A polymorphism, is a difference in the genomic str ucture of an individual 
compared to the remainder of the species. For examp le, amongst a litter of 5 lambs, 4 
have white coats and 1 has a black coat.  The difference in the DNA sequence of the black 
sheep compared to that of its siblings, that codes for coat colour is a polymorphism. 
 
 
 
SSLP analysis 
 
SSLP is based on the fact that most genomes contain  tandem arrays of multiple 
copies (Di-, Tri-, Tetra, etc.) of nucleotides.  Po lymorphism occurs as a 
consequence of variation in the number of repeats w ithin a specific nucleotide 
(simple sequence).  Oligonucleotide primers are des igned for the regions flanking 
these simple sequences and a Polymerase Chain Reaction  (PCR)  is carried out 
on the barley DNA. 
 
The PCR products are analysed through gel electroph oresis and the data 
automatically interpreted by the computer.  The cru cial point is the availability of an 
SSLP that correlates with a certain phenotypic char acter.  These SSLPs have been 
identified through major efforts around the world, some of them are freely available 
whilst others are offered as a commercial service.  
 
 
 
KEYPOINT:  PCR is the multiplication of DNA templates using t hermostable DNA 
polymerases and oligonucleotide primers. 
 
 
   RFLP analysis 
 
A non-PCR based method used in molecular marker ass isted breeding is 
Restriction F raction L ength P olymorphism  (RFLP) analysis.  During RFLP 
analysis specific DNA is digested by restriction en zymes.  Depending on the type of 
restriction enzymes used the DNA will be cleaved in to specific, discrete sequences 
of nucleotides.  These DNA sequences are then separ ated by gel electrophoresis 
based on their molecular weights.  The cleaved, separated DNA is then blotted onto 
a membrane and hybridised with a DNA probe of choic e.  Polymorphisms between 
two progeny lines can occur for example, because a restriction enzyme site is 
33 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
absent in one of the progeny lines. Some polymorphi sms have been identified and 
correspond to phenotypic characters.  This procedur e is more tedious than SSLP 
but since several good markers exist, this method is still very valuable. 
 
 
 
KEYPOINT:   RFLPs are restriction fragments of DNA whose leng th is variable throughout 
a population.  Endonucleases cleave DNA into polynu cleotide fragments (or restriction 
fragments). 
 
 
 
 Molecular markers 
More recently several laboratories have started hun ting for molecular markers 
corresponding to economically important traits such  as yield, malting quality, and 
extract potential.  These traits show a quantitativ e inheritance, which means that a 
continuous pattern of expression exists, rather tha n the discrete classes described 
above.  In other words, multiple loci, often on dif ferent chromosomes are involved: 
Quantitative Trait L oci (QTL) .  Statistical procedures are developed to integrat e 
the presence of multiple molecular markers with a d esired trait and the QTLs are 
subsequently assigned to a chromosome location.  It  might very well be that in ten 
years time a complicated trait such as malting qual ity is also assessed with a 
molecular biological technique. 
 
Other techniques include cloning genes to use as DNA probes, for the detection of 
specific nucleic acid sequences.  Tied in with this is the use of RFLP’s again, to 
map barley and wheat genomes.  From these chromosome maps, breeders may be 
able to pick and choose genes and markers corresponding to plant characteristics 
they desire. 
34 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Table 1.2 .  A general cereal breeding timetable 
YEAR 
No.  OFFSPRING 
GENERATION   
                                            ACTION TO BE TAKEN 
1 F 0 Parent 1 x Parent2 ( Crosses can be made during 
winter in artificial conditions) 
 F 1 Genetically similar heterozygous plants 
2 F 2 Large population of unique individuals 
3  F 3 Single plant progenies 
4 F 4 Progressively fewer families of single 
plant progenies 
5 F 5  
Time can be saved with these 
plant generations by carrying 
out simultaneous trials in the 
Southern Hemisphere, using 
Single Seed Descent or the 
production of doubled haploid 
plants. 
6 F 6  1ST  year breeding trials 
7 F 7 Multiplication of breeding stock 2nd  year breeding trials 
8 F 8 Breeding stock D.U.S Tests year 1  National List trials 
year 1 
9 F 9 Breeding seed D.U.S Tests year 2 National List trials 
year 2 
10  F 10         Basic seed 
11  F 11  
       1 st  Control Crop 
Recommended list trials, 
with provisional NIAB 
agronomic/malting quality 
grade assurance 
12  F 12         2 nd  Control Crop (A) Year 1 (B) Year 2 (C) Year 3 
35 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.1. Barley  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 