1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.8. Laboratory Analysis  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 1A: Raw Materials & Preparation 
of Cereal Wort 
 
Unit 1A.8 – Laboratory Analysis 
 
1A.8.1 Basic Concepts 
(a) Sampling Error 
 
The purpose of sampling is to make some estimate as  to the property of the bulk 
material without examining the whole of it.  A larg e bulk will generally require a large 
sample and for a small bulk consideration should be  given as to whether the analysis 
requires a destructive or non-destructive technique .  The sample must also be 
representative of the bulk as precise laboratory an alysis of non-representative 
samples may give seriously misleading information. 
 
In-line analysis allows the whole of the bulk to be  examined but these methods are 
frequently less accurate than laboratory techniques  and are probably best used as a 
screening process control procedure. 
 
The properties of some materials, such as plastic m ouldings, change after 
manufacture and such products should be sampled and  examined when their 
properties have stabilised.  Conversely some materi als such as wort deteriorate 
rapidly after sampling and care should be taken to ensure they are examined soon 
after the sample has been taken. 
 
Bulk beer samples must be homogeneous before a repr esentative sample can be 
removed and this is particularly difficult for ferm entation or maturation vessels where 
yeast growth or sedimentation may be taking place. 
 
Further details of sampling procedures for specific  areas of interest can be found in 
the relevant IOB, ASBC and EBC Analytical Method Manuals.  
 
(b) Accuracy and Precision 
 
Accuracy is defined as the ability of an analytical  method to provide results equal to 
the true valve.   
Precision is a general term to describe the amount of variation in a method. 
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.8. Laboratory Analysis  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
The differences between accuracy and precision are illustrated in a 'dart board' type 
of diagram shown in Fig.1 where it can be seen that  the best measurements are both 
accurate and precise. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) Repeatability (r 95 ) 
 
Repeatability (r95) can be used as an internal laboratory method check.    
Repeated analysis of the same sample, by the same a nalyst using the same 
equipment at the same time will give results that f all within the stated range95% of 
the time, or 19 analyses in 20. 
 
(d) Reproducibility (R 95 ) 
 
Reproducibility can be used as a between laboratories method check.   
Repeated analysis of the same sample by different a nalysts using different 
equipment at different times will give results that fall within the stated range 95% of 
the time, or 19 analyses in 20. 
 
   R 95 is usually greater than r95. . 
 
(e) Specification Ranges (Tolerances) 
 
When specification ranges are set, allowance must b e made not only for analytical 
errors but also for process capability and errors derived from sampling and  
* *
* * ** ** 
* *
Accur at e Pr ecise and accur at e 
*
   **    * ** ** 
*
*
I mpr ecise and inaccur at e Pr ecise but  inaccur at e  
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.8. Laboratory Analysis  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
averaging.  Analytical errors are usually well docu mented in the relevant methods 
manuals and can provide a conservative guide to the  minimum specification ranges 
required.  
 
To estimate the total errors involved, two approach es are described in the IOB 
methods, Statistical Section, one based upon Statis tical Process Control Theory and 
the other derived from BS4306 (ISO4259). 
 
(It should be noted that BS4306 is restricted to pe troleum products only which are in 
general homogeneous products in which serious sampling problems do not arise). 
 
Using Statistical Process Control Theory variations  within a process are usually 
assumed to be distributed normally about the mean.  The spread of variation is 
represented by the standard deviation, sigma, and f rom statistical theory 99.7% of all 
the actual values will be in the range 6 x sigma. 
 
The specification range, the interval between upper  (A2) and lower (A1)   must 
therefore equal or exceeed 6 x sigma. The ratio of the specification band width to 6 x 
sigma is termed the process capability (Cp). 
 
 Cp = A1 – A2       (1) 
   sigma 
 
A Cp value of 2 is usually recommended as the minim um acceptable value in the 
construction of specification bands. 
 
 
Using BS 4306 specification limits should be expres sed as 'not less than' or 'not 
greater than'. 
 
 Limits may be either: 
 a double limit, upper and lower 
 a single limit, upper or lower 
 
The value chosen for the specification limit should  take into account R(95) for the 
method and for a double limit the specificied range should not be less than 4 x R(95).  
 
 
 
 
(f) Simple Probability Calculations - Normal Distribution, Standard  
     Deviation, Variance 
 
A normal distribution of values around a mean can b e demonstrated by a 
 symmetrical 
curve as shown below 
 
 
The spread of the values, and the curve, is given by the standard deviation (SD). 
  
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.8. Laboratory Analysis  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Where : 
68% of all observations lie within Mean ± 1 Standard deviation (M ±1SD) 
95% of all observations lie within Mean ± 2 Standard deviations (M ±2SD) 
 
  SD is defined by the formula 
 
   SD =  (x1 – x) 2 / (n – 1)  
  where x1 = the individual result  
             x = the mean result 
                                  n = number of results 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For a distribution curve as shown in the above grap h approximately 68% of the 
values lie within ± 1SO, 95% within ± 2SD and 99.7% within ± 3SD. 
1.11.3.2 The Relevance of Inter-Laboratory Collaborative Checks 
 
The purpose of interlaboratory checks is to ascerta in whether the results from a 
laboratory for a particular analyte are acceptable when compared with other 
laboratories using the same or possibly different methods. 
 
All proficiency schemes should have their own proto col which should be available for 
examination. 
 
The major proficiency scheme for the brewing indust ry is the Brewing Analytes 
Proficiency Scheme (BAPS) which is run jointly by t he Laboratory of the Government 
Chemist (LGC) and the Brewing Research International (BRI).  Samples of a single  
 
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.8. Laboratory Analysis  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
beer are distributed every four weeks and participa nts analyse, on an optional basis, 
for analytes that of particular relevance or interest.   
 
A microbiological development of BAPS is also available. 
 
Other relevant inter-laboratory check schemes are t he Distilling Analytes Proficiency 
Scheme (DAPS) and the Independent Laboratories Collaborative Scheme (ILCS).   
 
The DAPS scheme uses robust statistics in which the  mean is replaced by the 
median and the standard deviation by the Median of Absolute Differences (MAD) 
from the sample median.  This is then multiplied by  1.483 to make it equivalent 
(MAD) to the standard deviation in the normal distribution. 
 
Results are reported in terms of Z - scores 
 
 Z score =   X 1 - assigned value  
       established standard deviation. 
 
The proficiency of a laboratory is judged by the absolute value of its  
2 – score using the following criteria - 
 
 
   Z < 2     =    Satisfactory 
 
   2< Z <3      Questionable 
 
   Z >  3      =  Unsatisfactory 
 
 
 
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.8. Laboratory Analysis  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.8.2.  Analytical Techniques 
 
The principles of analytical techniques for malt and wort (where relevant) 
 
(a) Malt  Hot Water Extract 
Malt is milled to produce a grist. 
 
Soluble material within the grist is extracted with hot water during mashing. 
At the end of mashing, insoluble material is removed by filtration leaving a clear wort. 
The specific gravity of the clear wort is determine d at 20° C and from this value the 
Hot Water Extract is calculated. 
 
 
(b) Total Nitrogen 
Two methods are in common use, one using the Dumas principle and the other using 
the Kjeldahl procedure. 
 
Dumas 
Samples are pyrolysed at 950 ºC in high purity oxyg en.  The combustion gases are 
collected and equilibrated to constant temperature and pressure.  A fixed volume of 
the combustion gases is then sampled and carried in  a stream of high purity helium, 
through a series of absorbents to remove moisture, oxygen and carbon dioxide.  
Nitrous oxides are reduced over hot copper and the resultant nitrogen is measured 
with a thermal conductivity detector.   
 
Kjeldahl  
Nitrogenous compounds are digested with hot sulphur ic acid in the presence of 
catalysts to give ammonium sulphate. 
 
The digest is made alkaline with sodium hydroxide s olution and released ammonia is 
distilled into an excess of boric acid solution. 
The ammonia is titrated with standard acid. 
 
 
 (c) Total  Soluble Nitrogen  
 
A standard laboratory wort is prepared as in IOB Me thod 2.4 (Malt, Hot Water 
Extract). 
An aliquot of the wort is evaporated almost to dryn ess in the presence of a few drops 
of concentrated sulphuric acid. 
The total nitrogen content of the almost dry residu e is determined as described in 
Method (b), above (Total Nitrogen Content). 
 
Malt moisture content is determined as described in  Method (d), below (Malt, 
Moisture Content). 
 
The total soluble nitrogen content of the malt is c alculated and expressed on a dry 
weight basis to two decimal places. 
 
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.8. Laboratory Analysis  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
(d) Moisture 
 
The sample is milled to form a fine grist. 
The grist is dried in an oven that has been previously standardised. 
The moisture content of the malt is calculated from the loss in mass during drying. 
 
(e)  Free Alpha-Amino Nitrogen 
 
The sample and a standard solution are heated in th e presence of ninhydrin at pH 
6.7 and the absorbances at 570 nm are measured against a reagent blank. 
  
For beers a correction for the colour of the sample is applied. 
 
It is recommended that the wort produced during the  course of malt analysis is 
diluted 2 ml in 100 ml. 
 
(f) Friability 
 
Whole malt corns are fragmented by the mechanical a ction of the Friabilimeter's 
revolving drum. 
Small corn fragments pass through the mesh of the d rum whereas larger fragments 
are retained. 
The mass of large fragments remaining after 8 minut es is determined and from this 
the friability is calculated. 
 
(g) Diastatic Power 
 
Malt is extracted according to Method (a), above (Malt, Cold Water Extract). 
An aliquot of the extract is allowed to hydrolyse a buffered starch solution. 
The amount of reducing sugars in the starch hydrolysate is measured by titration with 
Fehling's solution. 
 
The Diastatic Power (DP) is calculated from the titre. 
 
 
           (h) Fermentability                   
 
This laboratory test is used to determine the perce ntage of the Soluble Extract that is 
fermentable, and allows calculation of the Fermentable Extract. 
 
The method of determining wort’s Fermentability is by conducting a laboratory 
fermentation, and calculating it using the laborato ry Original Gravity (OG) and Final 
Gravity (FG).  
Malt fermentabilities are normally up to in the ran ge 86-90%. It should be noted that 
this laboratory test, based on laboratory wort, is not suitable for malts that have high 
sulphur content or those that are highly modified to achieve high TSN values. 
 
 
 
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.8. Laboratory Analysis  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
          (i) Fermentable Extract  
 
The % fermentability value multiplied by the Solubl e Extract value gives a figure for 
fermentable extract obtainable from the malt. 
The fermentable extract value is used to calculate a predicted spirit yield from the 
malt. 
 
 
           (j) Predicted Spirit Yield (PSY) 
 
It is possible to predict the distillery spirit yie ld from the laboratory data described 
above.  
 
In a malt distillery, this can be done using the ob tained values of the malt soluble 
extract (SE), the % fermentability and a fixed factor: 
 
             PSY (lpa/t, dwb)   = fermentability (%)   x   SE (dwb)   x  6.06 
 
(where lpa/t = litres of pure alcohol per tonne, and dwb = dry weight basis). 
 
 
In a grain distillery, the calculation is a little more complicated due to the use of both 
malt and wheat (or maize). The first step is to cal culate separately the PSY of the 
malt and the PSY of the other cereal. Then it is an  easy matter to calculate the PSY 
of the particular mash recipe in use at the time.  
 
For instance, in a distillery using 10% malt with a  PSY of 420 lpa/t and 90% wheat 
with a PSY of 370 lpa/t, the calculation and result is: 
 
                           420 x (10/100) + 370 x (90/100)  =375 lpa/t 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 