1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 1A: Raw Materials & Preparation 
of Cereal Wort 
 
Unit 1A.4 – Malt Processing in the Distillery 
 
1A.4.1.  Malt Performance - Requirements of Good Quality Malt 
 
(a) Introduction 
 
Two general types of distillers malts are produced commercially – malt for malt 
whisky and high diastatic malt for grain distillers  (see Table 4.1). Malt whisky malts 
are made from plumper, heavier kernels with a friab le starch mass. They are steeped 
and germinated at moisture contents ranging from 45  – 46%; the final temperature 
used in drying malts is in the range of 70 - 72 oC.  These malts are dried to 4.5 - 5% 
moisture.  Unlike brewing malt there is no final hi gh temperature cure so that all 
distilling malts should have negligible tint and produce almost colourless worts.   
 
Grain distillers’ (or high diastatic) malts are gen erally made from smaller barley 
kernels that are higher in protein and enzyme conte nt.  This barley is steeped and 
malted at a higher moisture content (48 – 50%) and dried at lower temperatures (50 
– 60 oC) to a higher final moisture content (ca 6%) than the malt whisky type of  malt. 
 
Table 4.1.   Comparative ranges in the composition of barley and malt. 
  Malt  
Measurement Barley  Malt Whisky High DP 
Kernel weight (mg) 38 - 42 32 - 36 29 – 32 
Starch (%) 63 – 65 58 - 60 50 – 55 
Sugars (%) 0.5 – 1.0 8.0 – 10.0 8.0 – 10.0 
Total nitrogen (%) 1.5 – 2.3 1.5 – 1.8 1.8 – 2.3 
Soluble nitrogen (% of 
total) 
10 – 12 35 – 45 40 – 50 
Diastatic Power 50 – 60 70 - 80 180 – 200 
α-Amylase Trace 35 – 45 60 – 80 
Proteolytic activity 
(arbitrary units) 
Trace 15 – 20 20 - 25 
 
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
(b) Malt Specifications 
Barley and hence the malt are derived from living m aterials and so are subject to the 
variations that can occur as a result of genetic an d environmental conditions.  This 
means that no two batches of malt are alike.  Malt analysis provides guidance on the 
effectiveness of the malting process and suitability of the malt for brewing. 
 
Malt is tested in accordance with the Institute of Brewing ( IOB ), European Brewery 
Convention ( EBC ) and the American Society of Brewing Chemists ( ASBC ) methods 
of analyses.  However, malt specifications are not always the most reliable indicator 
on how well the malt will perform in the brewery, a nd maltsters, brewers and distillers 
are continually looking for better predictions of brewing performance of malt. 
 
(c) Barley Variety 
 
Each variety has its own characteristics; its genet ic make-up determines whether it 
has qualities that are important to brewing.  Some varieties produce better distilling 
malts than others. 
 
The following characteristics will vary according to the barley variety: 
 
/head2right Percentage of nitrogen (protein) in the grain. 
/head2right Proportion of small to large starch granules. 
/head2right β-glucanase levels. 
/head2right Homogeneity of corn size. 
/head2right Ability to produce the necessary enzymes. 
 
 
These factors are also influenced by environmental conditions, e.g. weather, soil type 
and fertilizer.  The barley variety is also importa nt not only because of its spirit yield 
but also its wort composition which may influence fermentation and spirit character. 
 
 
 
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.4.2. Key Malt Analytical Parameters 
 
Table 4.2.   Typical list of analytical parameters used in spe cifications for  distilling 
malts. 
 
Analytical 
Parameter  
Abbreviation  Typical 
Distilling Malt  
High DP  Range (Dist. 
Malt only) 
Moisture (%)   5.0  6.0  4.5 – 5.0 
Hot Water Extract 
(%)  
HWE  76.5  71.7  76 - 78 
Fine Coarse 
Difference (%)  
F/C Diff  1.5  1.1  1.0 – 2.0 
Fermentability (%)   86.8  83.0  86.5 – 87.5 
Predicted Spirit 
Yield (litres of 
alcohol/ tonne)  
PSY  402  361  400 - 416 
Total Nitrogen (%)  TN  1.65  1.95  1.5 – 1.7 
Soluble Nitrogen 
Ratio (%)  
SNR  38 .6  44.1  37 - 40 
Phenols (ppm)   4  0 0 - 80 
Colour (EBC units)   2.3  2.7  2 - 3 
NDMA (ppb)   <1.0  <1.0  < 1.0 
α -Amylase  DU  36  75  35 - 40 
Diastatic Power 
(oL)  
DP  88  180  80 - 90 
Friability (%)   96  95  >95 
Homogeneity (%)   98  96  >98 
 
Key analytical parameters for malt distilling malt and examples of typical values are: 
 
(a) Moisture  < 5 %H 2O 
 
In the last 20 years, the moisture content has been  raised from 4 to 5 % for two main 
reasons. Firstly, gentler kilning helps preserve th e activities of the more heat-
sensitive enzymes, which can continue to work durin g the mashing and fermentation, 
releasing more fermentable carbohydrate. Second, th ere is a saving in energy. Malt 
is hygroscopic (attracts water) and there is normal ly a moisture pickup of around 
0.5% between maltings and distillery. So, if the ma lt is required to be 5% moisture, 
the off-kiln moisture should be 4.5%.  
Where there are adjacent maltings and distillery, i t can be dried to 5%. Malt with 
moisture content of 6% or more is difficult to mill , and there is the possibility that 
‘green-malt’ sensory notes may enter the spirit from lightly kilned malt.  
However, grain distilling malt moisture content can  be up to 6%, the lighter kilning 
preserving enzymes. 
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
(b)  Friability  and     96% of corns friable  
(c ) Homogeneity    98% of corns homogeneous 
 
The Friabilimeter is a laboratory instrument in whi ch a weighed amount of malt is 
subjected to pressure of a roller pressing it again st a rotating perforated drum. The 
more friable the malt due to modification, the more passes through the drum.  
This analysis is commonly used in malting as a chec k on the endosperm’s 
modification of the malt, to determine the homogene ity of the modification and to 
measure the percentage of corns that have not grown . It is widely used in the plant 
as well as in the laboratory.  
The information obtained from the Friabilimeter, wh ile a useful early indicator of the 
quality of malting, must be taken as complementary to laboratory results. In recent 
years, there have been severe problems with calibra ting these instruments, and 
results should be treated with caution, as they are  also variety and operator 
dependent. 
 
 
(d) Soluble Extract (SE)  > 80%(dwb) of malt materi als made soluble 
 
The units used to describe SE are ‘litre o/kilogram’ or ‘% extract’ (%). The two units 
are related by a factor. Both units are in use, depending on distiller’s preference. 
The SE2 figure is the maximum extract that is obtai nable from the malt, as milling at 
this 0.2mm setting (fine grind) mechanically breaks  up the cell wall material, 
releasing the starch granules. This figure varies l ittle with the degree of modification 
of the malt. Milling at the 0.7mm setting (coarse g rind) (SE7) releases only the starch 
granules that have been made available because of m atrix breakdown during 
malting, so it is a measure of the degree of modifi cation of the malt. The fine/coarse 
difference is normally about 1%. Some distillers pr efer to use a coarse SE figure 
obtained by milling the malt sample with a mill gap  setting of 1.0mm, but the vast 
majority use 0.2 and 0.7mm SE’s. 
The SE7 figure was chosen when the Miag laboratory mill became standard because 
its values were closest to the distillery’s mash tu n extract (mte), when the traditional 
mash tun was the norm. In the last about 30 years, there has been a gradual change 
in Scottish malt distilleries to lauter-type mash t uns, which have higher extraction 
efficiency. These tuns can achieve SE2 levels of ex tract, but the SE7 figure that is 
the most reliable figure for predicting spirit yield. 
 
(e) Fermentability                    >88% (dwb) of the extract obtained is fermentable 
 
This laboratory test is used to determine the perce ntage of the SE7 that is 
fermentable, and allows calculation of the Fermentable Extract (FE7). 
 
The method of determining wort’s Fermentability is by conducting a laboratory 
fermentation, and calculating it using the laborato ry Original Gravity (OG) and Final 
Gravity (FG). Malt fermentabilities are normally up  to in the range 86-90%. It should 
be noted that this laboratory test, based on IGB la boratory wort, is not suitable for 
malts that have high sulphur content or those that are highly modified to achieve high 
TSN values. 
 
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
(f) Fermentable Extract   >70%(dwb) 
 
The % fermentability value multiplied by the SE7 va lue gives a figure for fermentable 
extract obtainable from the malt. 
The fermentable extract value is used to calculate a predicted spirit yield from the 
malt. 
 
 
(g) Predicted Spirit Yield (PSY) 
 
It is possible to predict the distillery spirit yie ld from the laboratory data described 
above.  
 
In a malt distillery, this can be done using the ob tained values of the malt soluble 
extract (SE7), the % fermentability and a fixed factor: 
             PSY (lpa/t, dwb)   = fermentability (%)   x   SE7 (dwb)   x  6.06 
(where lpa/t = litres of pure alcohol per tonne, and dwb = dry weight basis). 
 
In a grain distillery, the calculation is a little more complicated due to the use of both 
malt and wheat (or maize). The first step is to cal culate separately the PSY of the 
malt and the PSY of the other cereal. Then it is an  easy matter to calculate the PSY 
of the particular mash recipe in use at the time.  
 
For instance, in a distillery using 10% malt with a  PSY of 420 lpa/t and 90% wheat 
with a PSY of 370 lpa/t, the calculation and result is: 
                           420 x (10/100) + 370 x (90/100)  =375 lpa/t 
 
 
 
(h) Total Soluble Nitrogen (TSN) 
 
Free α-amino nitrogen in the wort is required for the yea st growth that occurs at the 
start of fermentation. If wort is deficient in this  respect, the performance of the yeast 
fermentation will be affected. TSN measurement is u sed when there is any doubt 
about there being enough. It is unlikely that there  will be a shortage in malt whisky 
production. Some distillers specify high TSN values, which tend to depress laboratory 
fermentability values. Grain distillery wort can be  deficient particularly if the 
proportion of malt in the mash is lower than 9% (w/ w). Typical values are shown 
above in Table. 4.2 
 
(i) Malt enzyme levels 
 
Sometimes it is necessary to measure the enzyme lev els in malt. Two measures are 
used:  the dextrinising units (DU) that gives an in dication of the content of alpha-
amylase in the malt and the diastatic power (DP) power that gives an indication of the 
content of beta-amylase in the malt.  
 
Typical values for dried distilling malt are shown in Table 4.2 above 
 
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.4.3. Malt Delivery and Handling 
 
 
1A.4.3.1 Malt Delivery Procedures 
 
The maltster has responsibility to deliver malt of the specified quality in each load. In 
the past malt samples would be taken at the distill ery and re-analysed and compared 
with the maltster’s data. This was expensive and ti me consuming. Now, with quality 
management systems in place and guaranteed quality assurance schemes, the 
maltster provides an analysis with PSY on each load  for comparison with actual spirit 
yield in the distillery. However it may be necessar y to check deliveries if there is non-
compliance with the purchase specification.   
 
 
1A.4.3.2. Malt Intake 
 
The responsibilities of the distiller start as soon  as malt is delivered.  It is important to 
routinely check for malt parameters that can be aff ected in transit such moisture 
uptake, broken corns, dust, and delivered weight.   
 
(a) Sampling 
 
When the consignment of malt arrives at the distill ery, the delivery vehicle is weighed 
in and then again before it leaves; this is to chec k that the quantity delivered is 
correct.  At this point the materials are randomly sampled and checked for the quality 
parameters mentioned above.    
 
The sampling of malt can be carried out using spear s.  These are hollow spikes that 
are pushed into the load (see Figure 4.1), and when  withdrawn retrieve a sample of 
the grain.   
 
Many designs are available, but to avoid bias resul ts samples must be taken from 
randomly defined points throughout the grain bed.   
 
The main priority is to obtain a homogeneous batch of malt; this helps avoid 
production problems.   
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 4.1.   Compartmented spear samplers.  A)  and B)  are examples of whole bed 
samplers whilst C)  is used for sampling bags of cereal.  
 
 
 
KEYPOINT:  The most important issue for malt, whether during production in the 
maltings or during processing in the distillery is HOMOGENEITY.  Non homogeneous 
malt can cause problems such as  reduced extract recovery. 
 
Sampling is therefore very important.  In modern ti mes a more refined method of 
sampling is by use of a trickle filter or diverter system.  This equipment either 
continuously takes small samples of material as it is conveyed to the grain store or 
diverts the occasional sample into a collection cha mber as the conveyor transports 
the cereal. 
  The majority of distilleries unload their malt in to a delivery bay from where the malt 
will be transported to a storage silo, by pneumatic methods or conveyor belt. 
 A  B C 
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
(b) Storage 
 
The storage of malt requires the same diligence as storage of barley.   Most storage 
silos are constructed from stainless steel but they  can be made from concrete.  Silos 
have smooth walls with hopper bottoms to ensure eas y grain withdrawal.  The malt is 
stored at delivery moisture levels to: 
 
/head2right Discourage the growth of pests such as insects, mo ulds, fungi and bacteria. 
/head2right Prevent alteration to the biochemical structure of  malt prior to use (i.e. turning 
slack). 
 
Of course all storage silos should be cleaned at re gular intervals to prevent the build 
up of soil and contaminants.  
 
KEYPOINT:  Hand evaluation of the malt’s appearance and odour  should never be 
overlooked; it is a quick and easy method of  analysis. 
 
 
Malt should be delivered and stored in sufficient q uantities to defend against 
unforeseen shortages that could halt production.  H owever, storage should not be 
excessive – providing for only a few days’ requirem ents.  Otherwise capital becomes 
unnecessarily tied up in expensive material and storage capacity. 
 
 
(c) Screening/Grading and Dressing 
 
Prior to despatch from the maltings the malt is scr eened and dressed.   To ensure 
uniformity of milling, it is necessary to have a re asonable consistency in the size of 
corns.  To obtain such consistency, bulks of malt a re often graded.  The malt is 
carried by pneumatic or mechanical means past magne tic separators to rotating, 
cylindrical, oscillating or flat-bed screens.  Not only are corns of unwanted size 
rejected (these are sold for animal feed wherever p ossible) but residual malt culms, 
broken corns and dust are removed. In maltings wher e cleaning and grading is 
carried out on the barley  prior to steeping there should be a negligible amount of 
small corn removal in the finished malt and only de culming and dust extraction are 
necessary. Nevertheless,  some additional dressing is required at intake especially to 
remove accidental pick-up of metallic objects and t o remove small stones and gravel 
which have the same size as malt grains. 
 
Magnets 
It is essential that pieces of metal that may be in  the malt should be removed before 
they reach the mill, because such metal can cause a  spark and start a fire or 
explosion.  Separation is effected by placing perma nent magnets either in the malt 
chute to the dressing machine or across the feed to the mill. 
Malt should flow over the magnet in a thin layer an d at the same rate as it is being 
ground, thus allowing the magnet to extract any metal that may be in the malt. 
9 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Dressing and destoning 
The malt dresser was usually a cylindrical screen r evolving inside a wooden casing 
that has detachable doors on either side for easy a ccess.  The last part of the screen 
consists of a mesh large enough to let malt pass th rough to a small hopper feeding 
the weigher or the mill.  Any foreign matter such a s pieces of wood, metal, or stone, 
which are too large to pass through this mesh, is c arried forward to the end of the 
screen where it is rejected via a spout into a bag.  When the culms were separated 
from the malt during screening at the maltings, cir cular brushes revolved against the 
exterior of the screens thereby ensuring that the apertures were kept clear. 
 
In modern installations there is a separator/dresse r to remove foreign material based 
on size, and in addition a de-stoner  that separates material according to density.  
Usually these are inclined vibrating table separato rs on which higher density stones 
and gravel fall to one side and can be collected. M ost stones and gravel of this type 
are the result of high speed combining, especially in wet harvest years when barley 
may have become lodged in the field and cutter bars  have to be  lowered. In this way 
small stones of the same size as the malt grains ca n be removed and it has been 
found that the amount of stones can vary considerab ly according to the source of the 
barley. 
 
Dust Removal 
Dust is a dangerous substance because of the risk o f explosion and also irritation to 
the lungs.  It is now covered by COSHH (Control of Substances Hazardous to Health 
Act) regulations and it is extremely important that  dust is not allowed to accumulate.  
If a film of dust appears, measures  must be taken to eliminate the source of dust and 
vacuum any deposits – the presence of dust would in dicate a failure in the dust 
extraction system or leak in the plant. 
 
An electrically driven fan sucks the dust through m etal ducts or pipes from various 
points such as the elevator, dresser and weighing  machine.  There are several ways 
of dealing with the dust collected; it may be blown  into a cyclone from which it drops 
down into a bagging point.  In some installations d ust is blown into sleeves mounted 
inside a metal unit, on a frame that can be vibrate d at the end of the grinding or malt 
intake operation to shake off the dust.  The dust t hen falls into a container at the 
bottom.  A regular system of emptying the dust sack s or containers is necessary to 
allow the plant to work at maximum efficiency, and a periodical examination must be 
made of the pipe ducts to and from the fan to avoid build up and blockage by dust. 
 
Even if there is good housekeeping, it may not be p ossible to completely eliminate 
the risk of explosions in hoppers and conveying equ ipment.  For this reason, 
explosion vents are provided to allow an explosion to pass harmlessly into the 
atmosphere without damage to equipment and people. 
 
10 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.4.3.3 Safety Concerns (Dust) 
 
The operations encompassed within grain intake and milling are potential hazard 
areas within any brewery: 
 
/head2right Health hazards as a result of dust exposure.  Dust  has long-term effects upon 
the human mucous membranes causing diseases such as  pulmonary 
alveolitis. 
 
/head2right Risk of dust explosions. 
 
Why should the intake of malt and adjuncts cause su ch problems?  Although the 
maltster scrupulously cleans barley on intake and malt prior to dispatch, it is essential 
that the distiller also carry out rigorous screenin g of the materials on intake at the 
brewery.  Even after malting and cereal processing,  it is quite normal to find grain-
sized stones, grits, string, and straw and metal pa rticles that have escaped the 
cleaning operation.  If these objects are not remov ed they can pass through the mill 
into the mash.  These objects can cause damage to m ill rollers or even nudge their 
alignment; this can affect the milling operation an d therefore extract recovery.  The 
most important objective during the removal of debr is is to minimise the risk of 
explosion. 
 
Vast quantities of dust are produced when handling grain, especially during malting.  
For instance, values quoted for dust production are  in the range of 0.4 to 1.4 kg of 
dust per 100 kg of malt – a considerable volume.  T his dust is extremely dangerous 
and easily combusts.  One spark produced from a pie ce of stone or metal can be 
sufficient to cause an explosion.  This explosion c an cause significant damage to 
plant hardware, and is an obvious fire risk.  It is  for this reason that smoking is 
prohibited throughout the brewhouse (in addition to  food safety issues) whilst all 
equipment should be electrically earthed to avoid the production of sparks. 
 
Supplementary safety measures are also employed in connection with dust 
explosions: 
 
/head2right Metal explosion sheets are located below the mill rollers.  These hold back the 
grist to prevent the formation of an explosive air-grist mixture below the mill. 
 
/head2right Pressure release pipes (quench pipes) are installe d that convert the kinetic 
energy of an explosion into thermal energy, which i s released to the 
atmosphere.  This prevents damage to the plant; how ever, they must be 
cleaned after each discharge. 
 
/head2right Explosion suppression; inert gas is injected into the chamber milliseconds 
after an explosion to prevent its spread. 
 
Extraction systems are installed to remove all dust from the atmosphere in the mill 
room and ancillary plant.  This minimises health concerns and 
11 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
the risk of dust explosions.  This material can be recovered and mixed with the 
grist, a valuable method of extract recovery.  Alte rnatively it can also be mixed 
with the spent grains produced during wort separation and sold as animal feed. 
 
 
 
 
Table 4.3.  Malt Intake – The Key Risks 
 
Risk Potential Effect Prevention 
Damage /square4 Poor  mashing 
performance. 
/square4 Excessive dust 
generated. 
/square4 Gentle handling 
Moisture pick-up /square4 Biochemical 
change. 
/square4 Infestation. 
/square4 Keep system dry. 
/square4 Intake under 
cover. 
Consistent corn size /square4 Maximise milling 
and extract 
efficiency 
/square4 Screen to remove 
large and small 
corns. 
Protect plant /square4 Damage to mills. 
/square4 Explosion risk. 
/square4 Magnetic 
extractor. 
/square4 Screens/ 
explosion vent/ 
dust extraction. 
Hygiene /square4 Food safety. 
/square4 Infestation. 
/square4 Pest control. 
/square4 Cover intake 
hopper. 
 
12 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.2.  Dry goods intake .   
Malt/ adjuncts are loaded into the intake hopper (A ) and are transferred via 
the elevator (B) to the grain receiver (C).  The gr ain may then be weighed 
(D) before passing through the magnetic separator ( E).  The cereals then 
move through the cleaning screens (F) prior to a fi nal weighing (G), along 
the elevator (H) and conveyor (I), for storage in the silos (J).   
 
 
 
1A.4.4. Milling  
 
1A.4.4.1. Introduction and Summary 
 
In a malt distillery, milling must crush the starchy endosperm into fine particles while 
preserving the husk. The fine particles are needed to expose the starch and enzymes 
to liquid so that they can disperse in the mash. The husk is needed as a filter bed for 
the extraction. 
 
This process is illustrated below: 
 
A  
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H  
I 
J  
13 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
M illing 
Malt 
Mill Rolls 
G rist consisting of 
Flour 
G rits & 
Husk 
 
 
 
In practice there are usually four rolls in a mill in order to give the distiller good 
control of the particle size needed for the type of mashing vessel that the distillery 
possesses. The milled malt is called ‘grist’. It consists of malt flour, malt grits and malt 
husks. 
 
 
(a)The Purpose of Milling and Mill Types  
 
The purpose of milling is to prepare the malt, whea t and maize for mashing and 
starch conversion by making the centre of the malt corn accessible.  
 
Where a wort separation system like a mash tun or l auter tun is used, milling must 
crush the starch into fine particles while preservi ng the husk so that it can be utilised 
as an effective filter during separation. 
 
Distillery mills are designed to meet the requireme nts of different types of malt and 
inert cereals and the different mashing and mash separation systems that are in use. 
 
Four roll mills  are often used for milling well-modified malts whe re the starch is 
readily accessible and a mash tun will be used for mash separation. 
 
 
Six roll mills  are sometimes used for milling less modified malts  where the starch 
needs to be finely ground and the husk protected be cause of the aggressive 
treatment that the mash receives during cooking and  transfer to lauter tun. They are 
not widely used in malt distilleries since the specification is for well modified malt. 
 
14 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Feed roll controls the malt flow 
First pair of rolls crack the malt 
                   Sieve sends flour straight                
                       through, grits to the third pair                                             
                             of rolls and coarse pa rticles  
                             to the second pair of rolls. 
          
                             Second pair of rolls c rush 
                             the coarse particles. 
Sieve sends husk straight through, grits to the 
third pair of rolls and flour straight through. 
Third pair of rolls crush the grits.  
Six roll mill with screens 
 
 
In grain distilleries, it is not usually necessary to preserve malt husks for filtration 
purposes. Hammer mills  are used to achieve a fine malt grind, maximising the 
availability of the malt enzymes for the conversion  of the maize or wheat starch to 
sugars. The preferred particle size specification, assisted by screening as in the malt 
distilleries, could be < 4mm, most particles being at 2mm. 
 
Some distilleries use green malt , freshly produced malt that has not been stabilise d 
by kilning. In this case, the milling is done in a wet hammer mill. Again, the objective 
of the milling is to expose the enzymes need to effect  
conversion. Milled green malt has the consistency o f a thin porridge, no particles 
being greater than a quarter of a corn in size. Obviously, all green malt has to be kept 
as cool as possible and used as quickly as possible , for it would deteriorate rapidly in 
storage. 
 
 
KEYPOINT : In general 2- & 4-roll mills are suited to and us ed in combination with 
over/well-modified malts (e.g. malt distilling malt s) infusion mashing systems 
obviating the need for more complex 5- and 6- row mills. 
 
 
1A.4.4.2 Comminution  
 
Malt contains all of the essential ingredients for spirit production, all the distiller must 
do is open up the malt and add water, yeast and energy.   
The first step is to mill the malt and adjuncts to produce the grist  (cereal flour).  From 
the flour grist we extract  the sugars, proteins and other nutrients essential  for yeast 
fermentation.   
 
There are two main objectives of milling malt and cereals for brewing: 
 
15 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1. Particle size reduction 
2. Particle size control 
 
During milling, the malt grain is crushed so that t he highest possible yield of soluble 
nutrients can be extracted during mashing.  This ph ysical degradation of the malt into 
an array of small particles is called comminution .   
 
The greater the degree of comminution (i.e. the fin er the flour produced) the larger 
the surface area available for enzymatic attack – t his means there will be a better 
extract efficiency.  As a comparison it takes longe r for a sugar lump to dissolve in 
your coffee than a spoonful of granulated sugar.   
 
 
1A.4.4.3. Friability 
 
The action of comminution is influenced by malt friability .  What is friability?  The 
friability (extent of modification) of malt is a me asure of the amount of energy 
required to “crush” the grain.   
 
During malting of barley the endosperm is modified to differing extents with particular 
areas prone to under-modification (high nitrogen, s teely areas) and over-modification 
(the low nitrogen, mealy areas).  The internal stru cture of well-modified malts fully 
degraded by diastatic malt enzymes are said to be f riable – they are easily crushable 
and therefore require only a small input of mechanical energy ( milling ) to break them 
up.   
 
In the case of poorly modified malt, the internal s tructure of the grain remains fairly 
intact (they are less friable) and requires a high input of energy via milling to 
comminute the grain. 
 
Milling of well-modified malts yields grist with a large proportion of fine flours and 
small grits, whilst under-modified malts produce co arser grist.  This is because the 
endosperm cell walls that survive in an under-modif ied grain bind the particles 
together giving coarse grits.  Therefore, inhomogen eous batches of malt subject to 
the same milling operation (i.e. the same mill sett ing) will breakup into different sized 
particles – this is dependant upon the extent of mo dification.   
 
If milling is excessive the grist produced will be too fine for Lautering (but may be 
suitable for Mash Filters ).  Extremely fine grist will theoretically yield m aximal extract 
but hinder the separation of wort to the extent tha t wort filtration can be halted (a “set 
mash”).  Wort filtration ( lautering ) is affected by particle size because very small 
particles reduce the porosity of the filter bed, wh ich can become compressed.  This 
causes process down time, and various quality issue s associated with extended 
processing.   
 
There is therefore a trade off between extract yield and process efficiency. 
 
16 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Large grist particles  
Fast filtration = Reduced extract recovery 
 
Small grist particles  
Slow filtration = Increased extract recovery 
 
 
 
 
1A.4.4.4. Milling Operations 
 
(a) Compression and Shear 
The milling operation crushes the malt to release the extract for mashing.  The milling 
action is performed by pairs of rollers (set in seq uence) or by steel beaters (hammer 
mills).  When using roller mills the disruption of the grain structure is effected by: 
 
/head2right Direct compression on the grain. 
/head2right Shear forces. 
 
The grain is compressed as it passes between the tw o rollers, which rotate towards 
each other (Figure 4.3).  The rollers squeeze the g rain disrupting its structure to 
produce particles of varying sizes.  The shearing e nergy applies additional 
destructive force – this force is dependent upon th e difference in the peripheral 
speeds of the rollers.  High shear is produced when  only one of the rollers is rotating.  
The second roller is turned by the action of the fi rst, its rotational movement (and 
therefore destructive energy) transmitted through t he grain as it passes between the 
two rollers. 
 
Figure 4.3.  The basic components and operation of a 2-roll mill.    
Grains are fed between rollers A and B.  They compress and crush the grain into 
finer particles.  Roller A is rotating faster than roller B, this impacts shear forces upon 
the grain assisting breakdown.  Each roller is manu factured with 600-900 grooves 
(flutes) around their circumference, which intensif y the cutting action.  C is the rear 
angle and D is the cutting angle.  
A B 
C 
Flute Cutting Edge 
Flute Rear Edge 
D 
17 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Rollers arranged in parallel (essential for uniform  milling) should have a minimum 
diameter of 250 mm, otherwise the angle of nip  (the area which initially receives the 
grain to be crushed) is too small and performance is reduced (i.e. the crushing time is 
too short).  The surfaces of the rolls are fluted l ike a cog but do not run in parallel to 
the roller axis; they are set with a slight lateral  twist.  This design intensifies the 
“cutting” action applied to the malt as it is drawn through the rollers.   
 
The efficiency and capacity of the mill are therefore controlled by: 
 
/head2right Roller length. 
/head2right Roller diameter. 
/head2right Roller speed. 
/head2right The mill setting (the gap between the rollers). 
/head2right The friction between the malt and roller surface ( increased by fluting). 
 
(b) Mechanism of Grain Destruction 
 
We have established that malt passing through the m ill breaks up according to the 
friability of the kernel and the force placed upon the individual grain sections.  In 
Figure 1 we can see how the grains are fed to the r oller for crushing.  In practice the 
grains are sorted and pass through the preliminary crushing rollers end-on; this 
means that crushing occurs over the whole length of  the grain.  Typically, transverse 
breakage of the grain occurs, whilst the husk is in clined to split longitudinally.  This 
ensures that the endosperm fragments  
are released whilst the husk is separated but remai ns intact (remember the husk is 
important for Lauter filtration). 
 
During milling  for Lautering, it is important not to completely di sintegrate the grain.  
The husk plays an important role, during lautering,  as it forms part of the filter bed 
through which the wort is separated.  This proporti on of husk in the mash provides 
and helps maintain bed porosity.  If the husk is co mpletely shattered during milling, 
increased run-off times and inefficient wort clarif ication can detrimentally affect 
lautering.  Furthermore, the husk is a potential so urce of polyphenols, which if 
extracted into the wort will affect beer flavour and shelf life.   
 
If a mash filter is used to separate wort none of t he problems with grist particle size 
are applicable  
 
– as the filtration is performed through a polyprop ylene cloth.  This cloth (an artificial 
filter bed) comprises a huge number of very fine po res.  The wort is run-off through 
these pores, assisted by pneumatic compression of t he mash within the filter 
chambers. 
18 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
Figure 4.5.  A diagrammatic representation of a Hammer Mill. 
 
 
 
1A.4.4.5. Grist Evaluation 
  
One of the most important tools the distiller has a vailable is the plansifter.  The 
plansifter consists of a series of sieves (stacked as a column) through which a 100 to 
200 g sample of grist is shaken.  Each sieve is seq uentially set with a finer pore 
diameter.  There are five sieves that separate the grist sample into a total of six 
fractions. 
 
 
Table 4.4.  Plansifter sieve specifications. 
 
Sieve 
Number 
Fraction Wire Thickness 
(mm) 
Mesh Hole 
Size (mm) 
1 Husk 0.31 1.27 
2 Coarse grits 0.26 1.01 
3 Fine grits I 0.15 0.547 
4 Fine grits II 0.07 0.253 
5 Flour 0.04 0.152 
Sieve Bottom Fine Flour - - 
 
Grain Hopper  
Rotor 
Hammer  
Sieve 
19 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
It is important to check that milling achieves the correct specification for the grist.  By 
analysing the grist in this manner it is possible t o diagnose and pre-empt  mashing 
problems. 
Checking the grist allows us to check the integrity  of the milling operation.  If the mill 
operation has deteriorated (i.e. the rollers have b ecome worn or the mill setting 
disrupted) the extract recovery value will suffer. 
 
It is important though to set differing grist speci fications depending on whether a 
lauter tun or mash filter is to be used to separate  wort.  Remember the mash filter 
can cope with much finer grist than the lauter tun. 
 
 (a) Grist Analyses 
The quality of the grist or crushed malt that leave s the mill has a major effect on 
subsequent performance in the mashtun. If it is too  coarse, the starch will remain 
protected and the enzymes will not be able to convert it into sugar. 
If it is too fine, wort separation will be slow because the filter bed will become choked. 
Grist quality can be judged by ‘eye’ or by sieve analysis. 
To the eye, the grist should display large pieces o f empty husk and small pieces of 
white grist and flour. 
A traditional sieve box or more modern mechanical s ix sieve apparatus as described 
above is more objective and the ideal grist analysi s for the malt and the mashhouse 
plant in use should be specified. 
 
Examples of typical grist analyses for mash tun, la uter tuns and modern mash filters 
are illustrated in the charts below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.4. Malt Processing in the 
Distillery  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Additionally a histogram using the same data, which  shows a comparison of these 
typical grist sieve analyses, is shown : 
 
0
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
%
Mash 
Tun. 
Lauter 
Tun. 
Mash 
Filter. 
Comparison of Grist Sieve Fractions. 
Fine Grits 
Coarse grits 
Husk 
Flour 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1A.4.4.6 Milling Safety. 
 
Malt dust is hazardous, fine dust in the atmosphere  is explosive and breathing in the 
dust can cause respiratory problems. 
 
Malt mills are designed to prevent explosions. Magn ets fitted to collect any steel or 
iron debris that could cause a spark. Stone separat ors are also installed to prevent 
sparks and to protect the rolls from damage/wear. 
 
The modern mill and malt handling plant is fitted w ith explosion doors that would 
direct a blast safely outwards should an explosion occur.  
 
People working on the malt plant need to wear dust masks to avoid breathing in any 
dust. 
 
Safe systems of work (permits to enter confined spa ces) are required for people 
entering malt silos. 
 