1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.3. Fermentation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation  & 
Maturation 
 
Unit 2.3 – Fermentation  
 
 
Fermentation vessels 
 
The usual construction material of fermentation ves sels (washbacks in Scotland) is 
wood or stainless steel.  Epoxy-lined mild steel is  very rare now but was more common 
previously.  Stainless steel is virtually standard for fermentation vessels for continuous 
distillation, for which a capacity of 100,000 litre s or more is not unusual.  Many 
distilleries using batch distillation now have stai nless steel fermentors, but the traditional 
appeal of wooden vessels is an important marketing consideration.  The size of their 
fermentors is based on still capacity, and if the d istillery has only one pair of stills, it is 
normal to have fermentors of twice the working volu me of the wash still.  For malt 
whisky, that volume of wort is produced by one mashing cycle of the mash tun. 
 
Wooden vessels are normally of pine since the great er strength of oak and contribution 
to flavour, discussed in the maturation section of these notes, are irrelevant for the 2 - 3 
day cycle of fermentation vessels.  The usual desig n (Figure 2.3.1A) is a flat-bottomed 
cylinder of vertical planks bound by metal hoops.  A wooden lid with a removable hatch 
protects against contamination by insects, rodents and airborne micro-organisms, and 
an electrically driven rotating blade (“switcher”) is filled just below the lid as a 
mechanical foam breaker.  Nowadays the lid may carr y a spray-ball for cleaning 
purposes, and also for subsequent sterilization if live steam is not used. 
 
Steel vessels are of similar design, except for the  dished bottom (Figure 2.3.1.B) (or a 
sloping or conical bottom which gives the same result) to facilitate drainage of fermented 
wash, cleaning solutions and rinses, and a dished t op to avoid a right-angled corner 
which is difficult to clean.   Unfortunately, const ruction of these desirable features would 
be impossibly difficult with wood.   
 
Since the individual plates forming a steel vessel are unlikely to extend the full height as 
the planks of a wooden vessel must do, joins must be butt-welded and ground down to a 
smooth surface, at least on the inside (Figure 3.2. 1.C).  Riveted or overlapping welded 
joints create ledges which allow accumulation of re sidues and microbial contamination 
and are unacceptable.  The same requirement applies to pipework, as discussed in  
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.3. Fermentation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
section 2.4, Hygiene.  Attemperation is not normally fitted, but if it is, must be an external 
jacket, since internal cooling coils create obstruc t cleaning and sterilization procedures.  
One or more sprayballs, or a rotating jet, would be expected as standard for cleaning. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.3.1.  Fermentor design.    
A, traditional wooden vessel, B, mild steel or stainless steel.  C shows acceptable butt-
welding of plates, and an unacceptable overlapping joint.  The rivet makes it worse, but 
even with welding the overlap is a microbiological hazard. 
 
 
 
Yeast handling in the distillery 
Five sources of yeast are available to the distille r: natural inoculum, yeast cake, yeast 
cream, dried yeast and brewery yeast.  The naturall y occurring yeast flora of grape juice 
and molasses can be used either with or without a s upplementary cultured yeast.  In 
either situation a low level of SO 2 treatment is often used, insufficient to harm 
fermentative yeasts but hopefully inhibitory to bac teria and aerobic yeasts.  For further 
information consult the relevant sections of the Module 1 brandy and rum books. 
 
Yeast for on-site brandy, rum or whisky fermentatio ns should meet the following 
requirements (this does not concern brandy distillers using wine feedstock)::  
•  complete and rapid fermentation of sugars 
•  good flavour production  
•  tolerance of the osmotic stress of the initial 16 – 20% sugar concentration 
•  ability to continue fermentation to 8 – 10% alcoho l 
•  no flocculence or chain formation (clumps foul the  heating coils of pot stills and 
plates of continuous stills), and  
•  ability to grow well above 30 oC..   
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.3. Fermentation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
For industrial alcohol, growth up to 45 – 50 oC is desirable for a significant saving of 
energy for continuous distillation, but for potable  spirits 34 -35 oC is the usual maximum.  
In addition, for each batch of yeast inoculum, it i s essential to confirm that the yeast is 
the correct strain, is free from bacterial and wild  yeast contamination, and has high 
vitality and % viability (see below). 
 
Although some distilleries grow their own, the majo rity purchase their yeast from a 
specialist yeast culture company.  Commercial yeast  is sold as yeast cake 
(concentrated by filtration to about 28% dry weight ), cream yeast  (about 18% dry 
weight) and dried  in an inert atmosphere to about 95% by weight and sealed in a 
vacuum pack.  Dried yeast can be stored up to about  12 oC for at least 1 year but if 
chilled storage is already available that is common ly used.  Against the advantage of 
long storage is the nuisance of the routine require d for pitching.  Yeast from different 
manufacturers varies in rehydration procedure: one may require reconstitution in sugar 
solution of  precise concentration and temperature (e.g. 35 oC), another may more 
conveniently be scattered dry into the fermentation vessel when filling commences. 
 
Yeast with significant moisture content must be sto red in the range 2 – 4 oC.  Any lower 
risks freezing which would kill the yeast by ice cr ystals puncturing cell membranes, and 
higher accelerates deterioration, also encourages g rowth of any bacterial or wild yeast 
contaminants present.  Cream yeast must be used as soon as possible after delivery, 
certainly within one week.  Yeast cake can survive in chilled conditions for longer, but 
even so, use within one week is advisable.  At one time yeast recovered from brewery 
fermentations was widely used in the whisky distill ing industry but seldom, if at all, 
nowadays, largely because of its variable quality.  Again, chilled storage and use within 
a few days were essential to minimise microbiologic al problems.  Yeast cream stored in 
bulk is pumped in the calculated quantity to the fe rmentation vessel at the start of filling; 
yeast cake and brewer’s yeast must first be diluted  to yeast cream consistency in a 
mixing vessel before inoculation of the fermentor. 
 
Testing a yeast culture for contamination should no t normally be necessary if it comes 
from a reliable commercial culture plant, but a rap id test of viability and vitality is 
advisable, especially after more than a few days’ s torage.  The simplest test for viability 
is staining with methylene blue (MB), a redox dye w hich is blue in its oxidized state and 
colourless when reduced.  In a mixture of MB and di luted yeast culture examined under 
the microscope, living cells either fail to take up  the dye, or if they do, reduce it to the 
colourless form.  Either way, live cells are unstai ned.  On death, cells rapidly become 
permeable to MB, and lacking metabolic activity, re main blue.  A calibrated slide 
(haemacytometer, originally designed for counting b lood cells, which are the same size 
as yeasts) allows the percentage of dead cells to b e counted quickly and accurately.  
However, the method does not actually distinguish d ead from alive (i.e. capable of 
reproduction); the distinction is presence or absen ce of metabolic activity.  Above about 
90% this is unimportant, but.becomes increasingly significant with lower % “viability”.   
 
Although other redox dyes have been recommended as more reliable than MB, that is 
debatable, and measurement of yeast “vitality”, analogous to fitness in humans, is now  
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.3. Fermentation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
regarded as more meaningful.  Various methods have been suggested, but the simplest 
is measurement of “acidification power”.  Active ye ast added to unbuffered 20% glucose 
solution will cause a rapid fall in pH by the efflu x of H + associated with transport of the 
sugar across the cell membrane, to below pH 4 withi n 20 min.  Like the MB test, it is 
sufficiently rapid to justify testing before using a batch of yeast.  In an alternative version 
using the same principle, efflux of Mg ions is meas ured, but that requires more complex 
equipment than a pH meter.  Using a different princ iple, but also a rapid method, 
measurement of ATP content (obviously an indicator of activity) by its stimulation of 
bioluminescence of the firefly extract used in dete ction of microbial contamination (see 
the section on detection of contaminants) is also possible, but perhaps is an extravagant 
use of expensive reagents. 
 
 
 
Principal fermentation variables 
 
The sugar of grape juice is an approximately equal mixture of glucose and fructose, with 
smaller amounts of sucrose and  raffinose.  Cane molasses is mainly sucrose, with small 
amounts of fructose, glucose and raffinose.  For bo th of these fermentable media, 
uptake of the sugars is rapid since fructose and gl ucose permeases are constitutive, i.e. 
always present, in the cell membrane and the wall-b ound enzymes which hydrolyse 
sucrose and raffinose are formed rapidly in response to the presence of these sugars.   
 
Therefore all sugars presented to the transport sys tem of the cell membrane are 
monosaccharide.  In many strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae  fructose and glucose 
are transported simultaneously and metabolised at a pproximately the same rate, but 
others show some  preference for fructose transport or metabolism. 
 
The composition of cereal wort is more complex.  Ca rbohydrate constitutes about 90% 
of the total solids of all-malt wort.  Typical comp osition, expressed as % of total carbo-
hydrate, is maltose 46%, maltotriose 15%, glucose a nd maltotetraose each 10%, 
sucrose 5%, fructose 1%.  The remainder of the 100%  total is accounted for by 13% of 
malto-pentaose and higher dextrins, which are not f ermentable by distilling yeast at the 
time of collection of the wort, but are hydrolysed to fermentable sugars by continuing 
enzyme action during the fermentation.  The ratio o f these sugars is similar in grain 
distillery worts from maize or wheat.   
 
The sequence of uptake of the sugars discussed in U nit 2.2 is important: glucose (and 
fructose) first, then successively the increasingly larger saccharides. (Figure 2.3.2). 
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.3. Fermentation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
                 
  
Figure 2.3.2.  Sequence of utilisation of cereal wort sugars by distillery yeast.    
G= glucose, FS = fructose and sucrose, M2, M3, M4 =  maltose, maltotriose and malto-
tetraose.  The horizontal bars show the duration of G, M2 and M3 permease activity. 
 
 
Although an increase of temperature during fermenta tion is inevitable, many distillery 
fermentations have either no temperature control at all or only a spray of cold water over 
the vessels: an unusual situation since almost all other biotechnology industries operate 
with precise attemperation of fermentations.  So th e only control measure may be the 
temperature of the wort at the time of filling the fermentor.  In Scotch whisky distilleries, if 
the wort is cooled to 18–20 oC, the natural increase during fermentation is unli kely to 
exceed 33 oC, which distilling yeast can tolerate.  Ideally, t he temperature profile should  
be the same in successive fermentations otherwise v ariable amounts of flavour 
congeners are produced as metabolic by-products, pa rticularly esters and higher 
alcohols.  The effect of temperature and fermentati on variables on production of flavour 
congeners by the yeast is covered in section 2.2, M etabolism, and so is not repeated 
here. 
  
 
 
Progress of fermentation 
 
Microbial growth in general can be described in ter ms of the graph in Figure 2.3.3.  
Immediately after inoculation (pitching) into the c ulture medium, there is a period of 
adjustment to the new conditions. 
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.3. Fermentation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
 
Figure 2.3.3.  Simplified diagram of the principal changes during fermentation. 
 
Cultured yeast, grown aerobically in a low concentr ation of sugar, requires a period of 
adjustment to the new conditions of high sugar conc entration in fresh wort.  This is the 
lag phase, named because there is no detectable inc rease in cell numbers, but 
nevertheless it is a period of intense biochemical activity to prepare for active growth.  
Its duration depends on temperature, concentration of nutrients, previous history of the 
yeast culture and various other factors, but usuall y active yeast growth begins within 6 – 
12 hours.  In theory, the doubling cell numbers wit h each cell division gives a straight 
line if the logarithms of cell numbers are plotted against time, and this is true at constant 
temperature, but since  rum or whisky fermentations  can vary over as much as 15 oC, 
this causes some distortion of the graph.   
However, it is convenient to regard the growth/logarithmic/log phase as a straight line as 
in Figure 2.3.2. 
 
Normally growth eventually ceases because of lack o f nutrients, but in Saccharomyces  
fermentations, growth ceases when further multiplic ation is impossible because of lack 
of unsaturated fatty acids and sterols to synthesis e cell membranes.  This is usually 
after about 2 generations (when stationary phase be gins, because there is no further 
increase in cell numbers).  Actually, this is lack of nutrient (oxygen), required for 
synthesis of essential lipid material.  However, th e enzyme systems remain active, 
continuing alcohol production for some time longer, but since there is no growth, there is 
no further need for amino acids, etc.  So the simpl ified graphs of Figure 2.3.3 show 
yeast growth and amino-N graphs as mirror images, a lso falling sugar content and rising 
alcohol as mirror 
Images of each other.  Finally, a decline phase beg ins with death and autolysis of cells, 
and release of amino-N, which may happen with a rum  or whisky fermentation extended 
to 72 h. 
 
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.3. Fermentation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Figure 2.3.4. shows the actual progress of a typica l fermentation of cereal wort.  Similar 
figures apply to molasses except that amino-N is mu ch lower and a supplement of NH 4
+ 
would be necessary.  However the shape of the N gra ph would be essentially the same.  
Brandy fermentations are likely to last longer at l ower temperature in order to produce 
stronger estery flavours, but otherwise the same ge neral pattern applies over the longer 
time scale.  A standard quantity of pitching yeast is required, since significant variation 
alters the amount of yeast growth during the fermen tation, and therefore also the 
amount of excreted flavour congeners. The graph sho ws yeast as millions per ml, as 
measured in the laboratory, but in practice the yea st is added by weight (number of 25 
kg bags).   
Note a slight rise in amino-N towards the end of fe rmentation.  Part of the reason is that 
active growth has ceased, recycling of unnecessary enzymes has begun, and part of the 
resulting amino acid pool is excreted.  However, th e graph of yeast cell count shows a 
slight drop; if that is due to cell death and autol ysis, amino acids would be released.  
Since structural components of the yeast cells also  contribute to the distillate, in an 
extreme case variation in fermentation conditions c ould cause their composition to vary 
enough to affect flavour.   
 
Figure 2.3.4.  Progress of fermentation .   
The graphs refer specifically to whisky.  For rum, oBalling figures are more appropriate: 
SG 1060 = 15 oB, 1040 = 10 oB, 1020 = 5 oB.   
 
In a pure culture fermentation, the falling pH is r elated to efflux of H + ions with sugar 
transport, or excretion of metabolites such as pyru vate and succinate as acids.   In 
Figure 2.3.4 the pH graph falls quickly with sugar transport, then rises slightly with the 
buffering effect of amino acids excreted when activ e growth ceases but falls again with 
continuing growth of acid-forming bacteria.  In Sco tch malt whisky fermentations, a low 
level of contamination by lactic acid bacteria from  the malt is inevitable, but unusually 
heavy contamination can cause a significant alteration to the normal pattern and, by  
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.3. Fermentation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
competition with the yeast for the available carboh ydrate, reduce spirit yield..  In 
molasses worts the pH changes are more pronounced b ecause the N supply is mainly 
NH 4
+, with little or no buffering effect.   In both mal t whisky and dark rum fermentations, 
a low level of such contamination is often welcomed  for its contribution to the complexity 
of spirit flavour.  The situation with natural ferm entations of molasses or grape must is 
much more variable, and unpredictable, according to  the range of bacteria and yeasts 
present. 
 
Figures 2.3.4. and 2.3.5  both show fermentation ov er 48 h, but some rum and whisky 
distilleries ferment for longer, up to 72 h.   Assu ming the same original gravity and 
temperature, the progress of fermentation will be t he same over the first 48 h and 
subsequently the changes associated with amino acid  excretion and lactic acid 
production could reasonably be expected to be more pronounced, giving further 
development of flavour complexity.   
 
Figure 2.3.5.  Effect of bacterial contamination on pH during fermentation. 
 
 
 
Alcohol sensitivity and tolerance in yeast 
 
Although ethanol is the stress factor mentioned in the syllabus, high osmotic pressure 
from the initial sugar concentration is equally imp ortant, and many of the adverse effects 
are similar for both.  However, a specific problem from the organic solvent ethanol is its 
damage to the phospholipids of the cytoplasmic and other cell membranes. 
 
Fermentations for potable spirits seldom exceed a f inal alcohol content of about 10% 
abv.  Table wines are now commonly in the range 12 – 14.5% abv, fino sherry, which is 
produced entirely by fermentation (no brandy addition as with other types of sherry) is  
9 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.3. Fermentation  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
about 17% and sake, also by fermentation alone, is at least 20%.  The Saccharomyces  
spp. involved do not appear to suffer any ill effec ts from high final alcohol concentration, 
but these are specialized strains.  Distilling yeas t was bred for other properties; and 
tolerance of unusually high % alcohol was not one of them. 
 
Much of our present knowledge of the stress effects  on yeast of high initial sugar and 
high final % abv comes from the interest of the bre wing industry over the past 20 years 
in fermenting high gravity worts for subsequent dil ution to standard sales gravity.  In the 
yeast cell, stress is counteracted by increased pro duction of glycerol, glycogen and 
trehalose, the latter two in the larger than normal  vacuole, but under the microscope the 
most obvious effect of pitching into too strong wor t is plasmolysis (shrinkage) of the 
yeast cells.  The osmotic effects appear to be too strong for the cytoplasmic membrane 
to control.  High external alcohol concentration ha s equally drastic effects, partly since 
alcohol can not escape and more remains within the cell, affecting enzyme activity, and 
causing other damage.  In particular, high alcohol concentration damages (dissolves?) 
membrane structure.  Again, loss of intracellular m aterial causes plasmolysis and 
ultimately cell death. 
 
 
 
 
Further reading 
Chapter 4, Yeast and Fermentation (by I. Campbell) in Whisky: Technology, Production 
and Marketing, ed. I. Russell, 2003, provides more detailed information on the topics 
covered here. 
The several recent textbooks on brewing fermentatio n are also useful, provided the 
differences from distilling are borne in mind. 