1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.4. Hygiene  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation  & 
Maturation 
 
Unit 2.4 – Hygiene  
 
 
Spoilage micro-organisms and their effects 
 
The alcohol content of distilled spirits is too hig h for microbial growth to occur, but being 
a food product, a high level of physical cleanliness is required at all stages of production.  
In addition, fermentation vessels and associated eq uipment must be free from microbial 
contamination in order to maintain product quality.   In some brandy and rum distilleries 
microbial growth other than, or in addition to, cul ture yeast is encouraged for the flavour 
of the final product.  That aspect, discussed in Mo dule 1, is not contamination in the 
harmful sense that is the subject of this unit   The main microbial contaminants are listed 
here in alphabetical order rather than decreasing o rder of importance.  The named 
genera are also important contaminants of the brewi ng industry, and the reading list at 
the end of this unit refers to brewing literature, but the spoilage effects are different in 
breweries and distilleries.  It is important to be aware that the alcohol content of distilled 
spirits is too high for microbial growth  to be possible, but contaminants introduced with 
the reduction (dilution) water at the time of bottl ing may be able to survive.  Also, it is 
assumed that readers are already familiar with basi c microbiological methods, including 
Gram’s stain to distinguish between the two main types of bacterial cell-wall structure. 
 
Acetobacter and Gluconobacter .  The most important feature of these strictly aer obic 
Gram-negative bacteria is their ability to oxidize sugars or ethanol to acetic acid, 
produced in such quantity that the flavour of the a cid, and ethyl acetate produced by 
subsequent esterification, would be objectionable.  Also, yeast growth is inhibited by 
acetic acid, and not just by the low pH, since acet ate ion also has an inhibitory effect.  
The difference between the genera is that Gluconobacter  can oxidize only as far as 
acetic acid; whereas Acetobacter can eventually complete the oxidation to CO 2.  In 
addition to the well-known acetic acid spoilage of alcoholic beverages up to about 12% 
abv, they are common on plants, particularly sugary  fruits. Being strictly aerobic, they 
are no longer able to grow after a blanket of CO 2 forms in the fermentor head space 
once fermentation is under way. 
 
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.4. Hygiene  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
The normal habitat of the facultatively anaerobic G ram-negative genera Escherichia and  
Enterobacter  is the human and animal intestine.  Although some toxin-producing strains 
of Escherichia coli  are capable of causing human disease, that is an u nusual 
occurrence. The main significance of the normally n on-pathogenic E. coli  is that its 
presence in a water supply indicates contamination by domestic sewage or farm 
animals, so intestinal pathogens may also be presen t.  If present as contaminants of a 
fermentation, Escherichia and  Enterobacter  are no longer able to grow when about 2% 
alcohol and/or pH below about 4.6 have developed, b ut in their short period of growth in 
fresh molasses or cereal wort they produce objectio nable aromas which could taint the 
distilled spirit.  Obesum-bacterium , named for its unusually fat cells, is related to 
Escherichia and  Enterobacter , but is not known to have an intestinal habitat; i t is 
assumed to live on plant surfaces.  Obesumbacterium  has similar off-flavour effects but 
is slightly more resistant to alcohol and low pH.   
   
Lactobacillus  is probably the most likely bacterial contaminant of brandy, rum or whisky 
fermentations.  These Gram-positive non-sporing bac illi are common on plants in 
general and therefore on the three types of raw mat erials.  Although tolerant of the 
presence of air, lactobacilli grow only by anaerobi c fermentation to lactic acid, and 
possibly also to ethanol and CO 2, depending on the species (see unit 2.2).  
Troublesome strains can grow throughout fermentatio n, and also in the charger vessel 
for the still, being unaffected by anaerobic condit ions, ethanol or low pH, and able to 
utilise a range of simple sugars and dextrins.  Som e rum and whisky distillers regard 
moderate contamination by lactic bacteria as good f or flavour development, but 
excessive growth, over about 10 6/ml, causes not only unacceptable flavour but also loss 
of spirit yield by utilisation of fermentable sugar .  Pediococcus  is also a possible 
contaminant of this group, with similar nuisance ef fect to Lactobacillus , but less 
common.  Another coccus member of the lactic acid b acteria is Leuconostoc .  Leuco 
mesenteroides  is capable of growth in concentrated molasses or s yrup stocks of rum 
distilleries, using the glucose half of sucrose mol ecules to synthesise the viscous 
polymer dextran which blocks pipework and pumps.  H owever, Leuco.  oenos , is not a 
harmful contaminant in the malo-lactic fermentation , but quite the opposite, improving 
cider, wine and therefore brandy flavour by convert ing malic acid with its two –COOH 
groups to lactic acid, with only one.. A similar ty pe of reaction may take place in 
prolonged rum and whisky fermentations with Lactobacillus  spp converting di- or tri-
carboxylic acids to lactic, again resulting in a more mellow spirit.  
 
The Gram-negative rods of the genus Zymomonas  also live on plant surfaces as their 
natural habitat, and like the lactic bacteria are  tolerant of atmospheric oxygen but grow 
only by anaerobic fermentation: of fructose or gluc ose to ethanol and CO 2 (see Figure 
2.2.6 of unit 2.2).  Being unaffected by the final pH and alcohol concentration and more 
tolerant of the anaerobic conditions than S. cerevisiae , Zymomonas  is capable of growth 
throughout fermentation.  However, its production o f flavour congeners is likely to be 
different from the culture yeast, and therefore unwelcome.     
 
That problem of different congeners also applies to  fermentative wild yeasts, although 
they may be a useful component of the natural inocula of some brandy and dark rum  
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.4. Hygiene  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
fermentations.  Biochemically, there are two main t ypes of wild yeasts. The facultative 
anaerobes can grow during part or all of a fermenta tion (depending on alcohol 
tolerance), certainly affecting flavour but possibl y also spirit yield.  Not only are their 
metabolic products important, being different from distillery yeast, but distillation of wild 
yeast cells of different chemical structure could a lso affect the flavour of the distillate. 
Other Saccharomyces  spp., even different strains of S. cerevisiae  itself, come into this 
category, as well as other fermentative genera, of which Hanseniaspora (Kloeckera  if 
non-sporing) and Schizosaccharomyces are perhaps the most important.  Aerobic wild 
yeasts are restricted to growth early in the fermen tation, but some, particularly 
Hansenula  and Pichia spp., are capable of producing significant amounts of esters in 
that time.  Finally it is worth mentioning that a f ew wild yeasts which produce zymocin 
"killer factor" against culture yeast are a possible hazard of "natural" mixed culture grape 
and molasses fermentations but the risk is low.   
 
 
Detection of contaminants 
 
It is most unlikely that microbial contamination of  culture yeast or a fermentation could 
be detected by routine microscopical examination.  Wild and culture yeasts have similar 
appearance, and contamination by bacteria is diffic ult to detect against the background 
of  a much greater number of larger yeast cells.  S ince yeasts stain Gram positive, 
Gram- negative bacteria are more likely to be notic ed, but only in the high numbers of 
really serious contamination.  Specific immuno-fluo rescent staining can detect bacteria 
or wild yeasts in the presence of 100 – 1000 times as many culture yeast cells 
depending on the expertise of the operator, but requires special reagents and equipment 
(unit 2.1). 
 
So culture methods are more effective, but require 2 – 3 days’ incubation at 25 oC (1 – 2 
days at 30 oC).  Different methods are required for testing (a)  grape juice or wort before 
inoculation (seldom done, but possibly required to trace the source of contamination) or 
(b) culture yeast or an active fermentation.  Stand ard nutrient media are suitable for (a), 
and a spread-plate count with a 0.1 ml sample on ma lt extract agar (a useful medium for 
grape, molasses or cereal fermentations) can detect  contaminants down to 10 cells/ml.  
Using an indicator medium, e.g. Wallerstein medium (basically a synthetic equivalent of 
malt extract agar with added pH indicator bromocres ol purple) can distinguish by colour 
and shape.the colonies of different yeasts or bacte ria, i.e. distinguish that they are 
different, it is impossible to give a definite iden tification by colony morphology.  The 
same media can be used to confirm effectiveness of sterilization of a vessel, to grow 
contaminants trapped on a membrane filter of 0.45 m pore size after filtration of 250 ml 
of last rinse.      
 
Samples (b) require a selective medium to allow any  contaminants to grow but inhibit 
growth of the culture yeast that is known to be the re.  For detection of lactic acid 
bacteria and Zymomonas , and usually for the other bacteria listed above, “actidione 
agar”, i.e. Wallerstein agar + 100 g/ml of the anti-fungal antibiotic cycloheximide (a lso 
known as actidione) is most commonly used, but various other media on the same  
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.4. Hygiene  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
principle are also available. Yeasts are unable to grow in the presence of the antibiotic; 
but bacteria are unaffected and grow as normal colo nies.  Lactic bacteria and 
Zymomonas  grow by anaerobic metabolism and may require a red uced-O2, high CO 2 
atmosphere for first isolation.  That is most easil y provided by incubating plates in a 
sealed can, with a lit candle added just before clo sing.  Completely anaerobic conditions 
are required only for Clostridium  spp, which may be of interest to rum distillers. 
 
No selective medium exists to suppress culture yeas t but allow all other yeasts to grow. 
“Lysine agar” is the most useful, a synthetic mediu m of glucose, lysine, salts and 
vitamins, which depends on the inability of Saccharomyces  spp to grow on lysine as 
sole source of nitrogenous compounds (lysine taken in by the specific transport system 
can not be converted to other amino acids).  Most o ther yeast genera, and certainly all 
of the  common non- Saccharomyces  contaminants listed in unit 2.3, are able to utili ze 
lysine, and grow to normal colonies.  One problem w ith this medium is that it depends 
on starvation of the culture yeast, but even after thorough aseptic washing and 
centrifugation of the sample, sufficient intracellu lar N remains to allow growth of small 
colonies.  More seriously, wild Saccharomyces yeasts, probably more likely 
contaminants than other genera, can not be detected .  However, a modified actidione 
agar often works, with only 5  – 10 g/ml of antibiotic (whatever amount is found to be 
just sufficient to suppress the culture yeast) sinc e many wild yeasts have sufficient 
antibiotic resistance to grow. 
 
 
Rapid methods    
Since traditional culture methods require several d ays’ incubation various rapid methods 
have been developed to perform urgently required mi crobiological checks.  Accepted 
terminology.for these methods is: “instant”= no gro wth required; “rapid”= shorter 
incubation than the traditional method.   Two examp les of instant methods (both 
involving brief incubation, but not for growth of t he micro-organisms concerned) are 
immuno-fluorescence for detection of contaminants i n a yeast culture (unit 2.3) and the 
polymerase chain reaction (PCA) which is capable of amplifying minute amounts of DNA 
from specific contaminants.  A disadvantage of most  instant methods, and certainly of 
these two, is inability to distinguish dead from li ving cells.  Although PCA can detect 
contamination after a cleaning  cycle, it can not confirm the effectiveness of sterilization 
since the DNA may be from killed organisms, so its usefulness is limited.   
 
Rapid methods do recognise viable micro-organisms, but possibilities for distinguishing 
different types are limited.  The two most convenie nt and widely used are detection of 
ATP by bio-luminescence, and detection of microbial  metabolism by conductance, 
impedance or micro-calorimetry.  The principle of t he bioluminescence test is that light 
emission by fireflies (“glow-worms”) requires ATP, and the light intensity from purified 
extract of the insects in commercial kits of the lu ciferin/luciferase system is proportional 
to the amount of ATP.  Although the literature supp lied with the kit must be consulted for 
full details, the principle is that ATP is extracte d from the sample, and the light emitted 
by its reaction with firefly extract is compared wi th known amounts of ATP which can in 
turn be related to numbers of micro-organisms.  
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.4. Hygiene  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Conductance, and its reciprocal measurement impedan ce, change in culture media 
during the lag phase with ion efflux, and the chang e is proportional to the number of 
living cells.  Since these electrical effects are t emperature-sensitive, incubation of the 
samples requires a water bath accurately attemperat ed to +/- 0.1 oC.  The cells of the 
instrument (sample sizes vary from 5 – 50 ml accord ing to intention of the test) are each 
fitted with a pair of probes to detect and record e lectrical activity.  Comparing the graphs 
with those from calibration cells with known number s of commonly encountered yeasts 
or bacteria gives a reasonably accurate measure of numbers.  Commercially available 
selective media allow different types of bacteria o r yeasts to be recognised.  Alternative 
instrumentation is available to detect the heat pro duced by microbial growth, but for a 
rapid method to detect small numbers of micro-organisms. 
 
 
Cleaning and sterilization: definitions 
 
Physical cleanliness - visually clean. 
 
Chemical cleanliness – anything in contact with the  cleaned surface suffers no 
contamination.  In practice, clean water will compl etely wet the surface and drain as a 
continuous film without forming rivulets or droplets. 
 
Detergent – a cleaning agent.    By a combination o f physical and chemical processes a 
detergent removes soil from a surface. 
 
Biocide or Disinfectant – an agent for destruction of micro-organisms, but not 
necessarily 100%.  In the food industries the words Sanitiser, Sanitisation are commonly 
used to imply both combined cleaning and disinfection. 
 
Sterilant  – an agent for complete destruction or r emoval of micro-organisms, which is 
unlikely to be achieved by chemical means, and so i s often used wrongly as a synonym 
of disinfectant or sanitiser. 
 
Cleaning in Place (CIP) – Cleaning (not necessarily  automatic) without the need to 
dismantle equipment.  Automatic CIP is now almost u niversal for cleaning and 
disinfection in the distilling industry, not least to avoid as far as possible the manual 
handling of hazardous chemicals..  For cleaning ves sels, there are two principal 
methods of applying detergents  (a) low-pressure sp ray balls placed to cover the entire 
surface and (b) rotating high-pressure jets.  The p owerful stream of liquid from (b) gives 
the most effective cleaning, but the cleaning cycle  can not be shortened in the case of 
light soiling.  The jet must rotate itself through at least one complete cycle of coverage of 
the internal surface.  Also, some external indicati on is required that the jet is actually 
rotating.  The gentler spray from the ball relies s olely on the chemical effect of the 
detergent, but the entire inner surface is sprayed continuously during the cycle.  So for 
lightly soiled surfaces a shorter cleaning cycle is  acceptable.  It is essential to keep the 
holes in the ball clear, e.g. by a filter to remove solids from a recirculating system.   
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.4. Hygiene  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Cleaning of pipework is carried out by circulating detergent solution through the pipes.  
A flow rate of 2 m/s is accepted as providing the n ecessary turbulent flow for cleaning , 
without the risk of damage (e.g. water hammer) from  higher flow rate (Table 2.4.1).  
Clearly, >100 mm requires impracticable pumping rat es, although a lower flow rate 
would be acceptable for sterilization of an already cleaned line.   
 
Table 2.4.1.  Flow rate of detergent to achieve cleaning velocity 2 m/s in pipes . 
               Pipe diameter (mm)  Flow rate (litre s/min)  
          25      62 
          50    220 
          75    550 
        100    890 
          150             1550   
     
There are three basic types of CIP system: (a) a to tal-loss system, (b) a partial recovery 
system and (c) a full recovery system.  Total-loss is best for plant with heavy soiling, 
where recovered detergent would be too contaminated  for re-use.  Recovery systems 
not only save detergent, which can be topped up and  re-used, they also save water by 
using the final rinse as the pre-rinse of the next cycle.  In all cases, the cleaning cycle 
involves a pre-rinse to remove loose soil, and detergent re-circulation to clean the vessel 
and pipework.  After discarding or recovering the d ilute detergent, the vessel is rinsed 
with clean water.  A disinfectant may be added to t his rinse water.  A pulsed rinse cycle 
("burst rinsing") gives more efficient use of rinse water. 
 
Health & Safety aspects of distillery operation con stitute one of the units of Module 3, 
but is is important to mention here that detergent and biocide preparations are labelled 
as hazardous chemicals.  Therefore the storage, pre paration, use and ultimate disposal 
of such materials is subject to the UK Control of S ubstances Hazardous to Health 
(COSHH) regulations or their equivalent in other co untries, and according to the risk 
assessment and safety precautions literature provided with the products..   
 
 
Cleanliness and sterility requirements 
                
Fermentation is susceptible to microbial infection,  so the risk is minimised by steriliz-
ation of the relevant equipment.  Contamination at this stage is not a health hazard, 
since pathogenic micro-organisms or toxins are elim inated by the distillation process, 
but microbial contamination causes off-flavours and  loss of product quality.  Therefore 
vessels for preparation of pitching yeast, fermenta tion vessels, and pumps and 
pipework.associated with these items absolutely req uire both cleaning and disinfection.  
Sterilization of the still charger vessel and assoc iated pipework and equipment could 
also be considered, to reduce the risk of further m icrobial growth in fermented liquid 
awaiting distillation.  For all other stages of the  process, the physical cleanliness that is 
obligatory for a food product is sufficient. 
 
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.4. Hygiene  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
How often is cleaning required?  For stills the red uction of reactivity of copper surfaces 
and effect of accumulated soil on steam coil heat transfer (pot stills) or blockage of sieve 
plates (analyser column of a continuous still) are generally regarded as the most 
important factors, although the heated deposits cou ld also generate off flavours.  These 
effects develop slowly, so occasional cleaning is s ufficient.  However, plant for 
preparation of fermentable extract is much more sensitive.  The equipment for the cereal 
mashes of whisky and grain neutral spirit is most s usceptible to soiling, and cleaning 
(but not sterilization) after each use is essential , or various bacteria grow producing 
persistent off-flavours. For molasses and grape equ ipment, daily cleaning rather than 
after each use may be sufficient. 
 
Process plant surfaces have an important effect on cleaning and sterilization.  
Comparing the smooth surfaces of stainless steel an d copper with not only the 
roughness of cast iron and wood, but also the joint s between the plates or planks, it is 
obvious that the latter two are extremely difficult  to clean and disinfect (and probably 
absolute sterilization is impossible). 
 
 
Cleaning and detergent action 
 
Four distinct stages are involved in the actual cle aning, but easy rinsing is also 
important.: 
•  wetting of the surface to allow intimate contact b etween detergent and soil 
•  chemical action on the soil, e.g. solution of  min eral scale by acids, hydrolysis of 
protein by acid or alkali, saponification of lipid material by caustic detergents. 
•  dispersion of large particles as finely-divided so il. 
•  suspension in solution of any removed soil.   
 
Also, a good detergent allows efficient and complet e removal of detergent and 
suspended soil by final rinsing..   
 
Sodium hydroxide meets many of these requirements, and 2% NaOH used hot (> 70 oC)     
is also an efficient disinfectant, but it has two main disadvantages.   
(a) Precipitation of mineral salts, e.g. Ca, Mg associated with hard water, which is 
prevented by addition of sequestrants Na gluconate or Na 
hexametaphosphate to detergent formulations.  
             
(b) Reaction with CO 2, forming much less efficient Na 2CO 3, requires fermentation 
vessels to be drained of CO 2 before cleaning.   
 
So to avoid that lengthy delay, acid detergents hav e become common in the alcohol 
fermentation industries, with the additional advant age of action on mineral scale.  
Phosphoric acid with added surfactants makes a good CIP detergent.   
Some formulations also include nitric acid for grea ter detergency, also for disinfectant 
effect, but HNO 3 mixtures are destructively incompatible with coppe r or Cu-containing 
alloys.  However, the stainless steels commonly used in the fermentation industries are  
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.4. Hygiene  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
resistant.  Various organic acids are also possible , but have no advantages over H 3PO 3 
and are more expensive. 
 
Quaternary ammonium compounds and “amphoteric” dete rgents are "surfactants" which 
are now widely used in the food industries.  In a s ingle compound they combine 
detergent and disinfectant activity: their powerful  surface-active effect lyses microbial, 
particularly bacterial, cell walls and membranes.  However, they have serious 
disadvantages for the fermentation industries.  Foa ming during CIP is a problem, they 
are difficult to rinse off, and residues cause foam ing during fermentation, therefore they 
are not ideal for distillery use.  On the other han d, that residual biocide on food-
processing surfaces is an advantage. 
   
 
Biocides (disinfectants) 
 
All biocides are dangerous, since their purpose is to kill, so rigorous attention to safety is 
essential.   With automatic CIP there should be no requirement for manual handling of 
biocides, except for preparing the working solution .  Few of these agents kill all micro-
organisms, but if fermentation vessels, yeast mixin g vessels and associated pipework 
are cleaned and then treated to kill any remaining yeasts and the spoilage bacteria listed 
above, that is sufficient.  Absolute sterility of p lant is not justified when the fermentation 
medium itself is not sterile.   
 
Killing of micro-organisms by a disinfectant is influenced by: 
•  Concentration of disinfectant 
•  Temperature of disinfectant 
•  Number of micro-organisms 
•  Time of contact between disinfectant and micro-org anisms 
•  Amount of inert organic soil. 
 
Disinfection is a chemical reaction between the age nt and the target sites on the micro- 
organisms, therefore rate of reaction is increased by higher concentration and 
temperature.  Longer time of contact can compensate  for lower concentration and/or 
temperature.  Disinfectant is diluted by increased microbial load, and for some 
disinfectants, halogens in particular, inactivated by organic soil in general.   
 
The two most useful biocides for distillery ferment ation vessels and associated plant are 
steam and peracetic acid.   
Saturated (wet) steam is very effective for sterili zing cleaned  equipment only.  Steam 
bakes some types of soil on to surfaces, making it more difficult to remove, and may 
protect embedded micro-organisms.  Steam kills all types of micro-organism, although to 
achieve sterility at atmospheric pressure requires continuous steaming for 1½ hours.  
Steam is freely available in a distillery, and no s ubsequent rinsing is required.  However, 
radiated heat from a vessel being sterilized could affect a nearby fermentation if the 
vessels are too close.  
9 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.4. Hygiene  
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Peracetic acid is a fast-acting effective disinfect ant, even at ambient temperature.  The 
concentrated. acid has an unpleasant smell and is d angerous to handle because of its 
corrosive and strongly oxidising  properties, so is unsuitable for manual use.  However, it 
is a very effective final disinfectant in a CIP program.   
 
CH 3–C=O 
                       | 
                       O–OH 
 
Peracetic acid 
 
Peracetic acid breaks down first to acetic acid and  hydrogen peroxide (which also have 
anti-microbial activity) and then the latter to wat er and oxygen.  The small amount of 
acetic acid formed at use-dilution is insufficient to cause flavour taint so a final rinse is 
not required.   
 
Rinsing after sterilization is best avoided; or UV- sterilized water should be used.  
However, the other possible final disinfectants men tioned here must be rinsed, for 
obvious reasons.  Chlorine (as hypochlorite NaOCl) or iodine (as iodophor, a solution of 
I2 in a surfactant, which must be non-foaming for CIP ) are not widely used because of 
the risk of flavour taint from residue, but are ver y effective oxidising disinfectants.  Most 
NaOH detergent formulations give effective disinfec tion when used hot, but the alkaline 
residue must be rinsed off; and they are incompatib le with residual CO 2 in fermentation 
vessels. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Further reading 
 
The following chapters in Brewing Microbiology, ed.  F. G. Priest & I Campbell, 
collectively cover this unit: Gram-positive bacteri a, Gram-negative bacteria, Wild yeasts, 
Rapid detection and identification of microbial spoilage, Cleaning and disinfection.   
 
However, it is important to remember that (a) some of the spoilage effects described in 
beer do not exist in the distilling industry and (b ) the problems caused by specific 
bacteria in beer and distilled spirits may be different. 
 
 
 
 