1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 1A: Raw Materials & Preparation 
of Cereal Wort 
 
Unit 1A.3 – Malting 
 
 
1A.3.1 Evaluation of Barley for Malting 
 
1A.3.1.1 Characteristics of Malting Barley 
 
(a) Variety  
 
It is essential to buy barley of the desired variet y and quality at reasonable cost, then 
dry and store this valuable raw material so that it  remains viable and does not 
deteriorate. The selection of variety in the UK is from an approved list (IBD 
recommended list) of varieties available from relia ble seed merchants. The approval 
process for distilling malt varieties in Scotland i s faster than for UK brewing barley in 
that predicted spirit yields can be accurately dete rmined at the micro-malting stages. 
In this way new varieties can come to market faster . When barley is purchased by 
farm contract for delivery directly to the maltings  better control of varietal purity can 
be exercised. It is more difficult to control admix ture when dried and dressed bulks 
are purchased from third party barley merchants. In  the latter case samples have to 
be visually inspected for the characteristic “disti nctness” of the specific cultivar being 
purchased. This is a skilled task requiring training and knowledge of the grain’s visual 
features. Therefore, considerable trust has to be p laced on the farmer, seed 
merchant and grain merchant to deliver the specified variety.  
There may also be a special selection of varieties with high enzyme potential suitable 
for grain distilling. The diastatic power (DP) of m icro-malted samples give some 
indication of suitability for supply to this niche market. 
 
 
 
(b) Germinability 
 
  Barley drying, screening and storage may be managed completely “in-house” or can 
be out sourced, in whole or part, to barley merchan ts.  Barley is normally purchased 
in several different ways and there are a number of different criteria on which the final 
purchase price is based. The most important of thes e, after selecting the variety, is 
the germinability of the grain. If barley is being delivered undried and straight from 
the harvest field it will still be dormant and the only reliable test which can be applied  
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
is germination capacity (see details of these tests  below). For dried, dressed barley 
free from dormancy, germination energy can be determined. 
There are other issues and factors which influence the germinability of barley at 
harvest as noted below: 
 
/head2right In any delivery of barley at least 95% of the corn s must be alive. If the delivery 
fails to meet this standard it should not be accept ed at any price.  At harvest 
intake, it is impossible to carry out Germinative Energy (GE)  and 
Germinative Capacity (GC)  tests as these take too long – there a number of 
quick tests that can be used to determine moisture,  viability and nitrogen 
content so that purchasing decisions can be made.   
 
/head2right At harvest intake it is essential to establish tha t the supplier has not attempted 
to dry the barley himself because, under unregulate d farm conditions, this 
usually results in damage to the embryo and subsequ ently in failure to 
germinate.  Farm drying may be suspected if the moi sture content of a load is 
less than that of loads being received from other f arms in the area.  The drying 
operation costs money so this is reflected in the p rice paid for the barley – the 
higher the moisture the lower the purchasing price.  However large farming 
operations may have appropriate drying facilities o n site and as long as they 
are approved and well managed it is cost effective for the farmer to deliver part 
dried barley (<16% moisture)  to the maltings. This  is especially true in wet 
harvest years when the farmer may incur penalties f or higher drying costs on 
his deliveries and the maltster may risk infection and overheating if the wet 
barley cannot be uplifted quickly. 
 
/head2right Barley must be free from insect and microbial infe station.  Again, this is non-
negotiable and infected barley should be rejected o utright.  For example, 
harvested barley which has been left in unventilate d storage on farm for too 
long before uplift to the drier will usually show s igns of mould infection. This in 
turn causes overheating in the bulk and damages the  germinability of the 
grain. 
 
 
Other criteria are carefully thought about when ass essing barley for purchase and 
these are described in the following text.   
 
 
(c) Nitrogen (Protein) Content 
 
Premiums are paid for barley received at intake tha t has low nitrogen content.  
Nitrogen is used as a measure of protein content be cause most of the nitrogen in 
barley is in the form of protein; 1% nitrogen is eq uivalent to 6.25% protein.  At high 
nitrogen content, the grain could yield too little soluble extract and bring about 
processing problems.  It would therefore be rejecte d.  In certain years when barley 
growers encounter a very dry summer it may be impos sible to obtain sufficient barley 
at the specified nitrogen content.  The nitrogen sp ecification would have to be 
relaxed in this situation.  Nitrogen contents are m easured using automated 
equipment (e.g. LECO) which can cope with the intense workload at harvest time. 
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
The exception to the “low nitrogen” rule is barley selected for high enzymic malt for 
grain distilling. Most varieties generally have a h igher diastatic power the higher the 
protein content and barley with up to 2% nitrogen a re acceptable if they are of an 
approved variety. 
 
(d) Grain Size 
 
At intake barley is assessed by passing it through a sieve or screen.  The larger the 
average corn size the less barley will pass through  a 2.5 mm screen, and there will 
be a lower screenings  content.  Larger corns will give malt with a highe r soluble 
extract, and a good malting barley should contain >90% corns larger that 2.5 mm and 
<5% corns smaller than 2.2 mm. 
 
Uneven corn size distribution causes: 
 
/head2right Uneven steeping and germination rates. 
/head2right Increased malt screenings and losses. 
/head2right Milling and brewhouse processing problems. 
 
In maltings where high diastatic malt is made and w hen there is 10-15% of intake 
barley with corn sizes >2.2mm and <2.5mm, it is pos sible to segregate the small 
barley for separate steeping. Smaller grains produce more diastatic enzymes since: 
•  There is a higher concentration of aleurone tissue  per tonne of barley steeped 
•  Small grains have faster and higher water uptakes so malt more quickly to a 
higher modification 
•  Fully hydrated endosperm (ca 50% moisture) in smal l grains release the 
maximum amount of beta amylase 
 
Another method of measuring grain is Thousand Corn Weight (TCW) which as the 
name implies, is the weight of a thousand corns.  A lthough laboratory equipment is 
available for counting out corns, this takes time a nd is impractical under harvest 
intake conditions. 
 
(e) Dormancy 
  
As explained in 1A.1 on barley cultivation it is im portant that the grain does not start 
to grow in its natural environment until conditions  are ideal.  There is a biological 
system within the grain that holds it in a dormant  state for a certain length of time.  
The duration of this dormancy varies with barley variety, location and crop year. 
 
Severely dormant barley cannot be malted and theref ore it is important that the level 
of dormancy can be assessed before allocating this barley for production.  Using the 
GE  and GC Tests assesses the level of dormancy as follows: 
 
  % Dormancy = (GC – GE)    
 
 
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
(f) Endosperm Structure and Cell Wall Composition 
 
The overall levels of β-glucan in the cell walls can be dependent both on variety and 
on growing season.  Drought years tend to produce v arieties with high levels of β-
glucan.  Some varieties also have inherently high l evels of β-glucan.  However this 
may not be a problem if the variety produces high l evels of β-glucanase.  However a 
combination of high β-glucan and naturally low levels of  
β-glucanase could result in malts with some residual  and cell wall material leading to 
low malt extracts and slower mash-tun run-off. Howe ver this is not usually a problem 
with distilling malts and only occurs with selectio n of the wrong variety or 
exceptionally poor harvest years. 
 
 
(g) Endosperm Structure 
 
The endosperm structure can be influenced by nitrog en content.  Low nitrogen 
malting barleys have ‘mealy’ endosperms which indic ate that  there are fissures in 
the endosperm allowing more rapid uptake of water d uring steeping.  High nitrogen 
barley lacks these fissures resulting in a ‘steely’ endosperm and slower rates of water 
uptake.  Mealiness and steeliness can be assessed by simple cutting tests and visual 
examination. Again good varietal selection will usu ally deliver mealy grains except in 
very dry seasons when nitrogen levels are unavoidably high. 
 
 
(h) Pre-germination 
 
In very wet years grain may begin to germinate in t he ear.  Such grain will initially 
germinate very rapidly compared with other corns in  the bulk.  However if stored for 
any length of time the corns tend to die.  In eithe r case the result is unevenly 
modified malt. 
 
 
(i) Husk Content  
 
Malting varieties tend to have thin husks allowing more rapid moisture uptake, 
whereas feed barley has thicker husks resulting in slower rates of water uptake and 
less extract. 
 
 
1A.3.1.2 Methods for Assessing the Quality of Malting Barley 
 
Using some basic analytical methods and data it is possible to predict the eventual 
malt quality.  Some of these methods are described below.  The predicted data are 
compared with customer malt specifications and barl ey is then provisionally allocated 
to individual customers or malt types.  It is commo n to keep details of each barley 
reference including variety, merchant, location, co ntract specification and tonnage.  
Additionally it is good practise to keep analysis r esults for nitrogen (TN), TCW, and 
the Varietal Constants for each variety.  This info rmation may be used for calculating 
extract potential. 
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
(a) Micromalting 
Micromalting is a laboratory process where small sa mples of barley can be 
germinated using processing conditions resembling t hose in the commercial malting 
plant.  During micromalting, measurements are recor ded for water uptake and 
evenness of germination so that recommendations can  be made about the readiness 
of the barley for malting, the processing conditions to use, and the likely quality of the 
finished malt. 
 
Barley samples that have recovered from dormancy na turally, or conditioned in the 
laboratory, are micromalted to determine the actual  malt quality that will be 
achievable when the barley is fully mature.  There are different methods for 
micromalting ranging from glass jars to commercial equipment.  Although these 
methods are useful in predicting malt quality they have their pitfalls if the sample size 
is too small.  Basically, the bigger the sample the  more representative it will be of the 
batch of malting barley.   
 
With this detailed information at hand, confident d ecisions can be made when 
committing large tonnages of barley for production.  It is fortunate for distilling malts 
that there is such a good correlation between the f ermentable extract of micro-malted 
samples and eventual distillery yields. This allows  the maltster to select appropriate 
bulks to meet specific customer specifications. This information also provides realistic 
targets for the maltings production teams to aim at , together with indications of 
processing. 
 
 
(b) Germinative Energy 
 
The germinative energy of the grain sample is the p ercentage of kernels that 
germinate at the time of testing and gives a measur e of the dormancy potential of a 
sample. 
 
Method: 100 grains are placed on top of filter pape r in a petri dish 
and 4 ml of water added. After incubation, for 72 hours at 
18° C, the grains that have germinated are expressed as 
a percentage of the total. A mean of 200 corns per 
sample should always be taken [i.e. (a 100 corn sam ple) 
x 2]. 
 
 
 
 
(c) Water Sensitivity Test 
 
The objective of this test is to determine the pote ntial of the grain sample to grow in 
excess water – this reflects conditions during stee ping.  The method is similar to the 
GE test, but 8 ml of water replaces the 4 ml and co rn counts are made at 24 hour 
intervals.  Water sensitivity is expressed as the d ifference (as a percentage) between 
germination in 4 ml of water and germination in 8 ml of water. 
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
Example 
 
After 48 hours incubation, 91 grains of the 100 gra in sample have germinated in 4 ml 
water; only 75 of the 100 grains placed in 8 ml of water have germinated. 
 
Therefore, Water Sensitivity =  (91-75) = 16 
 
Or (16 x 100)/91 = 17.58% of the grains are water sensitive. 
 
 
 
(d) Germinative Capacity 
 
The germinative capacity of the grain sample is an attempt to quantify the percentage 
of viable corns within a sample.  This may include the forced growth of grains 
expressing degrees of dormancy. Most commonly this is achieved using a solution of 
hydrogen peroxide, to supply the corns with excess oxygen forcing the viable, yet 
dormant grains to germinate. 
 
Method: 200 corns are steeped in 200ml of 0.75% (v/ v) hydrogen 
peroxide for two days at 18-21° C. The corns are the n 
strained and 200 ml of fresh hydrogen peroxide adde d 
and the barley again incubated at 18-21° C for one d ay. 
The germinated grains are counted and the germinati on 
capacity expressed as below.  
 
 
Germination capacity % (hydrogen peroxide) =  200 –  n  
                                                                                  2    
 
 
n = corns that do not show roots 
 
 
In the IoB official recommended methods corns that fail to germinate after three days 
are peeled back and allowed to grow for a further 2 4 hours.  The additional number of 
corns that germinate are divided in half and subtracted from n. 
 
Example 
 
After 3 days germination 158 grains out of the 200 tested have germinated. 
 
So, GC = (200-42)/2 = 79% 
 
After a further 24 hours incubation another 12 grains have germinated. 
 
The adjusted GC = (200-30)/2 = 85% 
 
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
(e) Tetrazolium Viability Test 
 
Staining the grain with Tetrazolium chloride is use d for rapid assessment of the 
potential viability of the embryo.  This method rel ies upon the action of 
dehydrogenase enzymes that reduce tetrazolium salts causing them to turn red. 
 
Viable grains are split in half along the ventral f urrow and incubated in tetrazolium 
chloride solution.  Red embryos and aleurone layers  indicate active dehydrogenases 
are present and that the grain is viable.  Although  this test is important in the initial 
screening of barley for potential germinability, th e red coloration of the embryo does 
not necessarily guarantee that the embryo will germ inate and that the grain will malt 
satisfactorily.  It is quite feasible for dead grains to contain active enzymes. 
 
KEYPOINT:   A viability test determines the proportion of living cells or organisms in a 
sample. 
 
For germinative and viability tests maltsters deman d no less than 95% viable grains.  
Maltsters have no way of separating live kernels fr om dead, so the final malt will 
always have a proportion of dead grains, which will compromise its quality. 
 
(f) Extract Potential 
 
The extract potential of malt is usually determined  by the IOB mixed mash method.  
There are other methods and here The Bishop Equatio n is described.  This equation 
predicts how well a barley sample should malt, using a numbered scale.  
 
/head2right Good grades (7-9) 
/head2right Average grades (4-6) 
/head2right Poor grades (1-3) 
 
KEYPOINT:  Maltsters quote hot-water extract in litre-degrees per kilogram (l° /kg), 
expressing how many litres of wort each kilogram of malt will yield. In distilling it is 
more common to express this as a percentage of the malt, as is or as dry weight.  
E(%)= litresxdeg./3.87xkg 
 
E = A – 11.0TN + 0.22TCW 
 
 
 
E = Extract potential [x 2.96 = (l° /kg)] 
A = Varietal constant 
TN = Nitrogen level (% dry weight) 
TCW = 1000 corn weight 
 
This potential extract figure can also be used to p rovide a guideline for spirit yield by 
using a notional fermentability (Fy) percentage and  a distilling correlation factor of 
6.06: 
 
Potential spirit yield = E(%) x Fy/100 x 6.06 
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
The Bishop Equation derives potential soluble extra ct from the relationship between 
thousand corn weight (TCW), total nitrogen content (TN) and a varietal constant.  
This last parameter represents the capability a par ticular variety has for achieving 
good soluble extract.  The higher the varietal cons tant then the higher the malting 
grade of barley.    
 
The varietal constant depends on the following criteria: 
 
/head2right Germination potential. 
 
/head2right Potential to produce gibberellic acid. 
 
/head2right Rate of transport of gibberellic acid to the aleur one layer. 
 
/head2right Potential of aleurone to produce endosperm degradi ng enzymes. 
 
/head2right Rate of enzymatic breakdown and modification of th e starchy 
endosperm. 
 
 
(g) The Regularity Principle 
 
The Bishop equation demonstrates the “Regularity Pr inciple”.  The regularity principle 
describes the inverse relationship that exists betw een grain protein and starch 
content.  The equation states that the higher the g rain nitrogen content (protein) the 
lower the starch content and vice-versa.  The lower  the starch content of the grain, 
the less fermentable material or extract can be removed.   
 
Also the smaller the grain diameter or the thinner the grain the lower the extract 
potential.   
Another way to look at it is the higher the thousan d corn weight – the fatter the grain 
– the higher the proportion of starchy endosperm in  the barley; so large grains give 
malt with a higher extract.  
 
9 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.3.2 Barley Intake and Preparation for Malting 
 
1A.3.2.1 Barley intake, sampling and testing 
 
Depending on the method of purchase, the sampling a nd testing of barley at the 
maltings intake may be minimal, if the barley had been dried and stored on site or “in-
house”, or extensive if purchased from independent merchants. The different routes 
for barley to arrive at the maltings intake can be summarised as follows: 
 
•  Direct farm contract with the maltster or his agen t for specified barley varieties 
to be delivered to on-site or off-site drying and storage. 
•  Spot purchase of undried barley from farmer via ba rley merchants for 
specified barley varieties to be delivered to on-si te or off-site drying and 
storage. 
•  Contracted bulks of undried barley assembled by me rchants for maltsters’ 
drying and storage 
•  Dried and dressed barley purchased from merchants or farm co-operatives 
post harvest 
 
Since sampling and testing of harvest deliveries wo uld have been carried out on 
intake to the drier, the only tests required for in -house managed barley is recovery 
from dormancy or any residual water sensitivity in the new crop supply. More 
scrupulous sampling is required for barley being de livered to tight specifications from 
third parties. Prior to discharge, each load should  be representatively sampled by 
approved methods. The sample should first be visual ly examined for varietal purity. 
The grain can then be analysed in a few minutes for  moisture content, screening 
level and total nitrogen content. If all of these p arameters are within specification the 
load should be allowed to proceed to the intake poi nt. If, however, the load fails on 
any analytical parameter it should be re-sampled, r e-analysed and may be rejected if 
found still to be outwith specification. Once sub-s tandard barley has been taken into 
a maltings it is an expensive and troublesome opera tion to return it to the supplier 
through the maltings despatch system, especially wh en these plants are operating at 
maximum production capacity. On the other hand, sub-standard barley could result in 
customers malt specifications not being met. 
 
Note that the Germinative Energy Test is not carrie d out at intake, although it is 
carried out in the maltings laboratory prior to sch eduling that barley into production 
operations. 
 
 
1A.3.2.2 Preparation of barley for malting 
 
Barley and malt are stored in deep silos, some with  capacities in excess of 3000 
tonnes.  As a living tissue, prolonged storage in s uch conditions can suffocate the 
barley grain.  To prevent the cessation of grain re spiration, the barley is moved 
periodically for aeration.  This movement of the gr ain is often combined with cleaning 
and pest fumigation, in preparation for malting. 
 
10 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
The grain first passes over revolving or vibrating screens and sieves, in combination 
with air jets and magnets.  These act to remove any  non-barley material that is not of 
equal size or weight.  The material that is removed  can contain twigs, leaves, straw, 
stone, pieces of metal and dust.  Throughout maltin g, and indeed any grain-handling 
environment, great care is taken to remove dust and any material that could generate 
a spark.  This is to prevent violent and dangerous dust explosions. 
 
(a) Barley separation 
 
Separation takes place in long, rotating cylinders (Figure 2) that remove all grains 
that are shorter than barley, including broken half  grains and small weed seeds.  The 
cylinder has pockets or indentations on its interio r surface into which only the weed 
seeds and half grains will fit.  Only debris is ret ained in these indentations.  As the 
cylinder rotates further the retained material is e jected at the apex into a central 
trough for extraction.  Broken grains are especiall y undesirable as they will not malt 
normally; they pick up moisture easily and they har bour bacterial, fungal, and insect 
infestations. 
  
 
(b) Barley grading 
 
The barley is next subjected to grading, a relative ly slow process.  Grading is used to 
segregate grains of different sizes.  Different sized grains germinate at different rates, 
leading to non-homogenous batches of poor quality m alt.  For instance, small grains 
will hydrate and respire vigorously expending oxygen faster than large grains.   
 
The small grains will bolt , malting more rapidly and modify to a greater exte nt than 
the larger grains.  If unchecked, the malt will con tain proportions of under-modified 
large grains, and over modified small grains, both of which will behave differently in 
the mash-tun. 
 
During grading barley flows over vibrating screens or sieves fabricated with slots of 
defined sizes (Figure 3.1).   
 
Plump grains pass over the screen, whilst the thinn er grains fall through and are 
subject to further screening.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.1.  Schematic representation of 1) barley separation and 2) barley grading. 
 
 
Repeated sieving results in three grades of barley: 
 
/head2right 1st  grade:  The plumpest grains (>2.5mm), comprising > 85% of the grain 
bulk, used to produce standard malt. 
 
/head2right 2nd  grade:  Thinner grains (2.2 – 2.5mm), used for high enzymi c distilling 
malts. 
 
/head2right 3rd  grade & “thins”:  Grains <2.2 mm are unacceptably small for malting and 
are sold as animal feed. 
 
Once graded the barley is stored ready for use.  Gr ain is transported around the 
maltings in various ways including: 
 
/head2right Bucket elevators. 
/head2right Screw conveyors. 
/head2right Pneumatic systems. 
/head2right Endless belts. 
 
 
 
 
Cleaned, 
ungraded barley 
1st  
grade 
3 rd   
grade 
 
Thin 
s 
2 nd  
grade 
Barley  
Broken corns 
and weed seeds 
Sequential 
sieves 
1)  2)  
12 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.3.3 The Malting Process - Conversion of Barley to Malt  
 
1A.3.3.1 Introduction 
 
The starch granules in the barley endosperm are pro tected by being embedded in a 
matrix of protein. This matrix is surrounded by cell walls containing a gummy material 
called β -glucan. When barley germinates, it needs to get ac cess to the starch for its 
food and convert it to sugars, so: 
•  The germ  begins to form a root and a shoot, which  stimulates the production 
of plant hormones  ,  
•  These hormones then  stimulate the production of  enzymes in the aleurone 
layer and these enzymes diffuse into the endosperm and break down the cell 
walls  and protein matrix,, so exposing  the starch granules.  
•  The aleurone then  generates more enzymes which wo uld eventually break 
down all of the starch to sugars if the grain was l eft to germinate long 
enough. 
 
It is the last of these three things that is import ant for the distiller. The starch-
degrading enzymes in malt are used to break down th e starch in the malt grains or in 
any unmalted cereal that the distiller may choose t o use, maize or wheat for 
example.  
 
In malting the barley, there are three objectives: 
 
1. to produce malt grains with a high content of en zymes, 
2. to start the conversion of starch to sugar by re moving the endosperm cell 
walls and 
3. do this with as low a loss of starch as possible .  
 
 
This is done in three stages by: 
 
1. steeping the barley grains in water in a staged process of submerging them 
under water and draining the water off for a time ( resting) in order to reach a 
grain water content of about 45%, then 
2. transferring the grains to a suitable vessel thr ough which moist air is blown at 
a fixed temperature to allow even germination , (su ch vessels are also fitted 
with mechanical turners so that the growing grain c an be gently turned form 
time to time to prevent matting), then  
3. stopping the germination (killing the embryo) an d preserving the enzyme 
content by gently drying the grains by blowing warm  dry air through the malt 
bed.. 
 
The malting process is illustrated in the flowing diagram. 
13 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
 
Dried malted barley grains are similar in appearanc e to barley grains. They can 
easily be distinguished from each other by taste and bite. Barley tastes ‘mealy’ and is 
hard whilst malted barley is friable and tastes sli ghtly sweet and has the 
characteristic ‘malt flavour’.  
 
Malted barley is friable and easily milled because the endosperm cell walls have 
been broken down. The sweetness in malt is because a small amount of sugar has 
been formed from the starch. 
 
 
1A.3.3.2  The Malting Process - Steeping and grain hydration 
 
 The process of steeping determines final malt qual ity.  The purpose of steeping 
(soaking of the grain in tanks) is to initiate grai n growth through hydration.  Hydration 
of the grain facilitates even endosperm modificatio n.  Steep liquor must be of potable 
quality and free of taints.  If not, the impurities  will be passed on through the malt to 
the final beer, affecting its quality and stability. 
 
Why does grain hydration initiate germination? Befo re hydration the barley grain lies 
in a state of suspended animation, its growth has b een halted in the field through 
desiccation.  On re-hydration of the aleurone and e ndosperm, the revived aqueous 
condition provides a suitable environment in which the enzymes can regain functional 
activity. 
 
 
Figure 3.2.  Water uptake in barley. 
STEEPING 
1-2 days 
The seed is 
soaked in water 
to start it growing  
GERMINATION 
4-6 days 
The barley grows 
under controlled 
conditions and 
the changes 
occur inside the 
seed 
KILNING 
1-2 days 
 
The malt is dried 
Embryo 
= Water uptake  
Micropyle 
region 
Husk 
= Water movement  
14 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
During steeping, the husk rapidly absorbs water via  capillary action.  This prevents 
the grain dehydrating throughout malting.  However,  although this water will 
penetrate through the cuticular layers of the peric arp and testa, transport of salts is a 
problem.  If the husk dries out during malting, the  embryo withdraws moisture from 
the endosperm to survive, and as a result restricts  endosperm modification, 
generating poor quality malt. 
 
Water enters through the micropyle  region and passes into the embryo.  From the 
embryo, water migrates to the endosperm through the  scutellum, vascular tissue and 
finally via the aleurone layer. The rate of endospe rm hydration is slower than that of 
the embryo, which has consistently higher moisture content than the endosperm.  
Grain hydration follows a proximal to distal patter n.  Transfer of moisture from the 
embryo to the endosperm is most efficient on the do rsal side due to a greater 
proportion of vascular tissue, whilst the ventral f urrow hinders the migration of water.  
Barley has no internal capillary action;  
therefore, the grain must be fully immersed in wate r for complete grain hydration.  If 
total grain hydration does not occur modification w ill be incomplete, generating 
brewhouse problems. 
 
During malting the barley grain swells by a third, replacing the water lost as it dried in 
the field, prior to storage.  Water uptake occurs r apidly at first and slows as steeping 
proceeds.  A critical grain moisture level of 46% m ust be achieved.  Below 46% 
moisture there is insufficient water to support the  grain during germination and 
modification will cease.  Above 46% moisture the en dosperm can become over-
modified as the grains “bolt” through germination, creating poor quality malt. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.3  Steep hydration profile. 
 
Grain size also affects grain hydration.   Large grains proportionately take up water 
slower than smaller grains.  The small grains will therefore “bolt” through germination. 
The malt produced will be non-homogeneous, with proportions of over and under-
modified grains generating mashing problems. 
8 40  
32%  
46%  
20 
Hours steeping (16°C) 
Grain  
Moisture (%) 
12% 
15 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.3.3.2.1 Steeping technology 
During steeping, barley grains are placed in vessel s with capacities ranging from 60-
500 tonnes.  During the steeping process, the grain s are submerged in steep liquor, 
which is changed as required and the barley aerated  (known as an air rest) for the 
following reasons: 
 
/head2right To remove CO 2. 
/head2right To remove toxic metabolites. 
/head2right To remove competitive micro-organisms. 
/head2right To discharge excess heat. 
/head2right To replenish oxygen. 
 
 
Steeping can be carried out in dedicated conical or  flat-bottomed vessels, combined 
steeping and germination vessels (SGV’s) or steepin g, germination and kilning 
vessels (SGKV’s).  Most modern maltings utilise mic roprocessor control systems 
throughout the process. 
 
During steeping, hydration rejuvenates the barley g rain and respiration 
recommences, slowly at first, but quickly gaining v igour.  Grain respiration (the 
production of energy to drive metabolic processes) produces heat, CO 2, and 
metabolites. If unchecked, the heat generated durin g steeping as the grain respires 
has a cumulative effect and forces the grain to respire more efficaciously.   
 
Primarily, increased respiration causes the grain t o hydrate quicker, but in an 
irregular fashion throughout the grain population.   
The malt that results will be non-homogenous and po orly modified with the potential 
to cause brewhouse problems.   
 
 
To encourage even malting, the grain can be turned or agitated during steeping.   
 
Mixing of the steeping barley takes two forms: 
 
/head2right The grain can be agitated by bubbling air through the steep, as seen in 
Figures 3.4 and 3.5. 
 
/head2right The whole grain slurry can be pumped and re-circul ated to effect mixing, as 
shown in Figure 3.6. 
 
16 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.4.  A Flat bottomed steep vessel.   Mixing of the grain in these 
vessels is better compared to the conical vessels.  Rotating arms in 
combination with the circulating air can also perfo rm mixing.  Removal of the 
grains is more problematic, relying upon the mixing arms to push the grain out. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.5.  A traditional steep system.   The rising air separates and mixes the 
grain, dispersing the heat generated by grain respi ration, whilst also providing 
aeration. The conical vessel bottom allows easy liq uor and grain extraction when 
casting to germinating vessels. 
 
 
Good grain 
circulation  
Air  
Dead pockets of 
air that do not 
affect 
circulation 
CO 2  and water removal  
Barley exits to 
germination vessel 
Air in  
Moderate grain 
circulation 
Dead pockets of air that 
do not affect circulation 
17 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
The steep water can also be removed and changed to maintain optimal 
temperatures. Substitution of the steep water has a dditional benefits.  Throughout 
steeping the grain produces metabolites such as eth anol and CO 2 during anaearobic 
respiration.  Such metabolites are, in sufficient q uanitites, toxic and can stifle grain 
growth and hydration.  This can lead to the product ion of poorly modified malt.  
Rejuvinating the water reduces the accumulation of these compounds and so lessen 
their toxic effects. 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.6  A Conical steep vessel with central circulation . The grain 
slurry is circulated around the vessel aided by the  action of the rising air.  
The vessel design gives easiest grain removal, eith er under gravitational 
force or pumped to exit. 
 
The steeping process physically washes and cleans the grain, leaving dirt suspended 
in the steep water.  This can be removed when steep water is changed. 
  
1A.3.3.2.2 Steeping systems and air rests 
(a) Systems for setting up steep regimes 
Reliable information regarding the quality of barle y to be steeped from laboratory 
tests, determines the steep regimes to be used.  Th ese tests could include variety, 
moisture, germination energy, water sensitive tests , total nitrogen, TCW and 
screenings, steeping and germination data, soluble extract and modification analyses 
of the micromalt.  With this information it is poss ible to confidently select a steeping 
cycle.  Typically, multiple steep regimes will incorporate several air rests.  The only  
Air  
Grain removal 
The Grain slurry is pumped round to 
effect excellent circulation 
18 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
critical factor in determining the frequency of air  resting is the economics of malting, 
with the quickest and most efficient process the most profitable.  
 
A selection of typical commercial regimes can be seen below. 
 
 
(1) 
8 hours steep  
/barb2down 
16 hours air rest 
/barb2down 
24 hours steep 
 
 
(2) 
8 hours steep 
/barb2down 
10 hours air rest 
/barb2down 
10 hours steep 
/barb2down 
2 hours air rest 
 
(3) 
6 hours steep 
/barb2down 
10 hours air rest 
/barb2down 
6 hours steep 
/barb2down 
6 hours steep 
/barb2down 
6 hours air rest 
 
 
During air resting, air is passed through the grain .  Although barley has no capilitary 
action, spraying during air resting can prevent gra in dehydration.  Replacing the 
surface film of moisture also helps prevent heat bu ild up, as barley respires more 
vigourously when out of steep. 
 
 
 
(b) Multiple steeping and evenness of germination and modification 
 
Barley is immersed in water at a given temperature in order to increase the moisture 
content and to initiate germination.  It is importa nt that the moisture content of the 
resulting germinating barley is distributed as evenly through each corn as possible.  If 
this were not the case then uneven, partly modified  malt may result.  Also, the 
steeping of water sensitive grains must be consider ed.  These requirements can be 
met by the use of multiple steeping cycles where an air rest with good CO 2 extraction  
19 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
follows each immersion.  In the case of water-sensitive grains, experience has shown 
that if the amount of water taken up by the grain i n the early stages of steeping is 
limited then the water sensitive grains will begin to germinate.    
 
                                                                                                            
(c) Initiation of Germination 
 
If the grain moisture can be raised to a suitable l evel to initiate germination (30 - 
33%) and then a long air rest is carried out, the g rain will be able to accept more 
water without being damaged.  If too much water is given too quickly the grain will be 
killed and then is useless to the maltster. – econo mic losses also occur. 
 
Other benefits arising from the use of multiple wat ers are that germination vigour can 
be enhanced and higher moistures can be achieved in shorter times compared with a 
single immersion.  The duration of the air rest per iods is dictated by the volume of air 
available (i.e. fan size) for CO 2 and heat removal.  Also in multiple steeping there  is 
efficient removal of substances leached from the grains that provide a medium for the 
growth of microbial populations. 
 
 
(d) Air Rest Temperature 
 
As a general rule, air rest temperature should not exceed 21-23 oC as damage to the 
embryo could occur and certain enzyme systems can b e impaired – especially 
proteases that break down the protein matrix in whi ch the starch grains are 
embedded.  A consequence of this could be that less  starch is available to the 
brewer leading to reduced soluble extract, increase d viscosity leading to poor mash 
tun run-off – both of which would reduce the throug hput of the brewery. 
 
Once germination has commenced it is important that  steeping raises the moisture of 
the grain to a level that will promote the producti on, distribution and activation of the 
enzymes.  Generally moisture of 45 - 47% is typical  for malting but, as stated 
previously, it is important that this moisture is d istributed as evenly as possible 
throughout each grain. 
 
 
(e) Steeping Cycles 
 
Two typical examples of steeping cycles are shown b elow.  The first programme is 
designed to cope with water sensitive barley and pr oduce malt using a conical steep 
system.  The second programme is designed for fully  mature vigorous barley to 
produce malt using a flat-bottom steep system.  In example two the use of only two 
steeps also has the added benefit of economising on water use.  
 
      
 
 
 
 
20 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
                                                                                                       
 
Example 1 – early season barley (Camargue) 
 
Grain profile: 4 ml test = 96%; 8 ml test = 79%; wa ter sensitive; average nitrogen 
(1.7%). 
 
Malt type required: well modified, high enzyme, medium – high moisture (47.5-48%). 
 
 
Programme Hours Comments 
1st S 5 Short first steep to combat water sensitivity. 
1st  AR 14 Long air rest to promote germination. 
2nd  S 5 Increased water uptake. 
2nd  AR 14 Long air rest to encourage vigorous growth. 
3rd  S 5 High moisture to help enzyme development. 
3rd  AR 5 Short time in steep to prevent heat buildup. 
 
 
 
 
Example 2 – mid/late season barley (Pipkin) 
 
Grain profile: 4 ml test = 99%; 8 ml test = 96%; lo w nitrogen (1.6%); small grain size 
(20%<2.5mm). 
 
Malt type required: well modified; high enzyme; med ium – high moisture (47.5 – 
48%) 
 
Programme Hours Comments 
1st  S 14 Long first steep to attain moisture of about 37%. 
1st  AR 20 Long air rest to promote germination. 
2nd  S 12 Long second steep to achieve final moisture. 
2nd  AR 12 Extended germination period by holding in st eep. 
 
 
(f) Monitoring of Steeping 
 
From the outline on the previous page of practical steeping it is obvious that certain 
key parameters must be monitored and recorded in or der to control the steeping 
process.  The main considerations are temperature, moisture content and 
germination count. 
The temperature of the incoming steep fill and re-f ill water is monitored and 
controlled so that the initial mix temperature of t he 1 st  steep is attained (12-16 oC 
depending on individual barley requirements).  The temperature at the end of each 
air rest is recorded, and also the time taken to attain this temperature in order to  
21 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
maximise these periods in subsequent batches.  The laboratory analyses grain 
samples from the end of the 1 st  steep, end of the 2 nd  steep and cast stages of 
steeping to ensure that the moisture targets are being attained. 
 
Growth counts are performed after casting to ensure  the batch is germinating 
adequately and evenly.  Generally more than 80% of the grains should be chitting at 
this stage. 
 
(g) After Steeping 
 
The germinating barley is transferred (cast) into t he germinating vessel by gravity or 
conveyor, depending on the individual malting plant . The empty steeps are then 
cleaned to maintain adequate hygiene standards. 
 
       
                                                                                                     
1A.3.3.2.3 Factors influencing water uptake 
 
Moisture content of 45% - 47% is desired because th is is the point at which 
germination can start.  Achievement of this depends upon the rate and the quantity of 
water uptake by the grains. The following factors g overning water uptake are critical 
to the process. 
 
(a)Temperature 
 
The effect of temperature on the rate of water upta ke is shown in Figure 3.7.  The 
desired level of moisture is achieved after 100 hou rs of steeping with a water 
temperature of 15 oC while the barley steeped at 5 oC lags behind.  The higher the 
temperature  the faster the rate of uptake.  Initial water uptak e is a purely physical 
process, but if germination has started, the rate of water uptake changes.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.7.  The Effect of Temperature on Water Uptake. 
0
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
0 20 40 60 80 100 
Hours steeped 
% Moisture 
5oC 
15oC 
22 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
(b) Grain size 
 
As shown in Figure 3.8, barley with a grain size of  2 mm will achieve the desired 
moisture content within a single 48 hour immersion steep while larger grain cannot 
achieve the same rate of water uptake.  The larger the grain sizes then the slower 
the uptake of the water.   It is worth noting that the relationship between gr ain size 
and water uptake is not directly linear.  A grain t wice the size will not absorb at half 
the rate.  However, it is undesirable to have small  grain size barley in a process 
batch as it has a much lower HWE potential than the larger grain. 
 
                                                                                                           
Figure 3.8.  The effect of grain size on water uptake. 
 
 
(c) Protein Content 
 
Mealiness (i.e. when the endosperm of the barley is  low  in protein) and steeliness 
(endosperm high in protein) have an effect on water  uptake - steelier grains will have 
a lower rate of uptake. 
 
 
(d) Grain Viability 
 
Once germination commences and the chit appears, th e rate of water uptake 
increases significantly. 
 
 
(e) Variety and Crop Year 
 
Varieties that have a loose husk or tend to split d uring wet growing seasons will take 
up water faster than other varieties. 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 
G rain size (m m ) 
% Moisture 
23 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.3.3.3 The Malting Process - Germination and Endo sperm 
Modification  
 
(a) Gibberellin synthesis 
 
The most important function of the embryo during ge rmination is the production and 
release of the plant hormone Gibberellic acid  (GA)  – this is one hormone of the 
gibberellin family.  It is this plant hormone that stimulates the aleurone layer to 
synthesise and deliver the majority of the hydrolyt ic, endosperm-degrading enzymes, 
e.g. α -amylase. 
 
Gibberellins are synthesised in the embryo.  Produc tion of gibberellins is induced 
within the first two days of embryo growth, during steeping, when integral embryo 
reserves have been depleted.  The gibberellins are then transported to the aleurone 
through the vascular tissue of the grain, aided by the proximal-distal flow of water 
during grain hydration.  After reaching the aleuron e, the gibberellins stimulate the 
production and release of the modifying enzymes. 
 All malting barley varieties which have been appro ved for distilling, have fully 
recovered from dormancy and are not water sensitive  produce sufficient GA to 
generate maximum fermentable extract in an all malt  mash. This means that there is 
no need to supplement the natural synthesis with ad dition of exogenous GA during 
germination. The only exception to this may be in m aximising enzyme production in 
malt used for conversion of unmalted cereals in gra in distilling. This practice is 
banned in Scotch whiskey distilling but may be used in other countries.  
 
 
The pattern of endosperm modification is determined by: 
 
1. The localised development of the vascular tissue . 
2. The ventral furrow. 
3. Degree of enzymatic contribution from the scutel lum. 
4. Mealiness or steeliness of the endosperm. 
5. Temperature of germination. 
 
The vascular tissue is developed to a greater exten t on the dorsal side of the grain.  
Therefore, water and gibberellin distribution throu ghout the aleurone layer is greatest 
on the dorsal side of the grain.  The hydrolytic en zymes are consequently released 
into the endosperm quicker and in greater concentration, than from the ventral side of 
the grain where the vascular tissue is defined to a  lesser extent.  This profile of 
aleurone stimulation and response results in an asy mmetrical pattern of endosperm 
modification when viewed in a time course manner (Figure 3.9). 
24 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
Figure 3.9  Asymmetric grain modification.  Area of greatest m odification 
(1) through to the least modified (7). 
 
 
The ventral furrow that runs along the lower side o f the grain impedes water and 
gibberellin distribution.  This causes slower and r educed enzyme release and 
therefore, diminished endosperm modification in the ventral grain region. 
 
The scutellar epithelial cells are stimulated to pr oduce approximately 10% of total 
grain α -amylase, (dependent on variety).  As such, this ad ditional input of α -amylase 
may affect the distribution of endosperm modificati on, reinforcing the proximal-distal 
pattern of grain modification in relation to starch degradation only. 
 
Within the endosperm, areas of localised steeliness  will hinder the distribution of 
water and impede enzyme dispersal.  In these regions of the starchy  
endosperm, under-modification will occur.  The oppo site is true for grains with 
localised areas of increased mealiness, creating re gions of over-modified 
endosperm. 
 
Increasing germination temperature excites the wate r molecules within the grain.  
This facilitates quicker enzyme dispersal and there fore, improved modification.  
However, excessive temperature increases will quick ly dehydrate the grain and 
modification will cease due to a lack of enzyme activity. 
 
  (b) Enzymes and substrates Involved in endosperm modification 
On stimulation with gibberellic acid, the aleurone layer synthesises ( de novo ) and 
releases a wide range of hydrolytic endosperm degrading enzymes, including: 
/head2right α -amylase 
/head2right Limit dextrinase 
/head2right Endoprotease 
GA 3 
Release of hydrolytic 
enzymes from the 
aleurone layer 
1 2  
3  
4 
5 6 
7 
Movement of GA 3 from the 
embryo through the 
vascular tissue to the 
aleurone layer 
25 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
The aleurone also releases the following enzymes, b ut it is unclear as to whether 
they are produced de novo or that they are zymogens (which are inert precurso rs to 
active enzymes) activated within the aleurone layer: 
 
/head2right Endo- β 1,3:1,4 glucanase 
/head2right Endo- β 1,3 glucanase 
/head2right Pentosanases  
/head2right Phytase 
 
 
The starchy endosperm does not synthesise but alrea dy contains the enzymes (as 
zymogens): 
 
/head2right β -amylase 
/head2right Carboxypeptidases 
 
 
Once the production of the specific enzymes has com menced, synthesis continues 
through the normal period of germination and the co ncentrations of these enzymes 
steadily grow. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.10  Endosperm cell structure  
 
The abundance of enzymes noted above is necessary for the release and conversion 
of the endosperm starch.  In sequence, the outer ce ll walls must be degraded (by 
proteases) before carboxypeptidases, glucanases and  pentosanases can attack the 
inner cell walls.  Only after sufficient cell wall degradation can the proteases 
hydrolyse the storage protein matrix to expose the starch granules.  The α - and β -
amylases can then liquefy and saccharify the starch , respectively.  This allows 
transport of the sugars, along with the amino acids  derived from the protein matrix, 
through the scutellum to the embryo.  The scutellum  epithelial cells elongate to aid 
absorption of the nutrients into the embryo. 
Protein 
middle 
Outer wall 
(β -Glucan and 
pentosan)  
Inner cell wall 
 ( β -Glucan)  
Starch 
granules 
Protein 
matrix 
26 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 (c) Cell wall  ββ ββ -Glucans and Pentosans  
The walls of the endosperm cells comprise a mixture  of hemicelluloses and gums.  
Hemicelluloses and gums are mixtures of polysacchar ides with similar chemical 
structures.  The relatively insoluble hemicellulose s are alkali extractable and are 
degraded to gums (warm water-soluble) probably thro ugh proteolysis.  The 
hemicelluloses are less soluble due to their increa sed molecular weights and/or their 
increased degree of internal cross-linking. 
 
The major components of the hemicellulose and gum f ractions of the barley cell wall 
are:  
 
/head2right β -D-Glucan (70-75%) 
/head2right Pentosans (20-23%) e.g. arabinoxylan. 
 
 
Approximately 5% of the cell wall is made up of pro tein as a middle lamella, but the 
β -glucans and pentosans are the most important in brewing and distilling. 
The water-soluble β -D-glucans are unbranched polymers of glucose.  The y comprise 
approximately: 
 
/head2right 70% 1 → 4 ( β -1-4) linked β -glucosyl units. 
/head2right 30% 1 → 3 ( β -1-3) linked β -glucosyl units. 
 
 
β -D-Glucans can be extracted in water at different t emperatures, revealing glucans 
with different structural chemistries. 
 
/head2right 40° C β -D-glucan (MW 400,000) extracts contain β -1,4 linked glucosyl residues 
separated by individual β -1,3 linked glucose residues. 
 
/head2right 65° C β -D-glucan (MW 4,000,000) extracts contain β -1,4 linked glucosyl 
residues separated by individual β -1,3 linked glucose residues and discrete 
blocks of β -1,3 linked glucose residues. 
 
 
The primary consideration with β -glucans during malting is their initial degradatio n to 
facilitate further modification of the internal end osperm cells.  However, β -glucans 
form extremely viscous solutions in water; those ex tracted at 65° C are more viscous 
than those extracted at 40° C.  It is the size of the polymers and extended sections of 
discreet β -1,3 linked residues within these β -glucans extracted at 65° C, that generate 
the increased viscosity.  These sections also affec t the polymer susceptibility to 
enzymatic attack. 
 
 
27 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
A host of enzymes are involved in and responsible f or the degradation of β -D-glucan 
including: 
 
/head2right β -glucan solubilase (a carboxypeptidase) 
/head2right Endo β -1,3:1,4 glucanase 
/head2right Endo β -1,3 glucanase 
/head2right Exo β -1,4 glucosidase 
The β -glucan is possibly anchored to peptides or protein s within the cell wall by ester 
bonds.  The ester bonds must be ruptured (cleaved b y a carboxypeptidase acting as 
an esterase) for enzymatic degradation of the β -glucans to continue. 
 
After initial hydrolysis (by the carboxypeptidases), the β -glucans are subject to attack 
by the endo-β -glucanases.   
 
/head2right Endo- β -1,3-glucanase attacks the β -glucan chain cleaving only at β -1,3 links 
adjacent to other β -1,3 links, (i.e. β -glucans extracted at 65° C).  
 
/head2right Endo- β -1,3:1,4 glucanase attacks and hydrolyses β -1,4 links adjacent to β -1,3 
links (see figure 5). 
 
/head2right The final hydrolysing enzyme is exo β -1,4 glucosidase.  Unlike the previous 
 enzymes, which attacked internal bonds, exo β -1,4 glucosidase attacks the 
 terminal β -1,4 link. 
   
 
These enzymes act in synergy to release anchored β -glucan, (carboxypeptidases) 
reduce the polymer sizes (endo- β -1,3-glucanase) and then degrade the solubilised 
glucans (Endo-β -1,3:1,4 glucanase). 
 
The glucanases that degrade the cell walls are heat  labile. Significant activity is lost 
during kilning and little survives preliminary stee ping.  Therefore, the glucanases 
(that degrade the β -glucans) will not be present in the mash tun and i f β -glucan 
degradation was only partly achieved during germina tion, highly viscous wort will 
result.  However, carboxypeptidases are heat stable  and can release β -glucan during 
mashing where solubilising enzymes are devoid, and viscous worts cannot be 
avoided.  Therefore full enzymatic degradation is essential during malting. 
 
Consequently, the above enzymes hydrolyse the β -glucans to generate the 
disaccharides cellobiose or laminarobiose which wil l eventually yield monomer 
glucose units.  Generally, malt β -glucan levels are between 80-90% lower than in 
unmalted barley. 
 
The pentosan component of the endosperm cell wall comprises β -1,4 linked  
xylose polymers connected to arabinose at the 2, or 3 position of the xylose 
monomer unit.  Pentosans are in general only slightly soluble and remain within 
the malt.  Any that do dissolve are degraded by the pentosanases present. 
28 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
Figure 3.11  Hydrolysis of β -D-glucans by β -glucanases. 
 
 
 
(d) Endosperm protein and proteolysis 
The protein embedded within the endosperm cells for ms a dense matrix surrounding 
A and B-Type starch granules.  This protein matrix must first be hydrolysed during 
malting, to facilitate enzymatic starch degradation  during mashing.  Additionally, 
protein degradation provides the Free Amino Nitrogen (FAN)  for grain embryo and 
yeast nutrition.  If sufficient proteolysis does no t occur during malting, a loss of 
potential extract will ensue along with other associated problems. 
 
The proteins contained within the endosperm matrix are defined by their solubility 
characteristics. 
 
/head2right Albumins  and Globulins : dissolve in water or dilute salt solutions. 
 
/head2right Hordeins  and Glutelins : dissolve in alkaline or hot alcohol solutions, in  
association with reducing agents. 
 
The less soluble storage proteins, hordeins and glu telins predominate in the 
endosperm matrix.  Hordein and glutelin contain large amounts of the amino acids  
Exo β -1,4 
glucosidase 
Endo β -1,3:1,4 
glucanase 
Endo β -1,3 
glucanase 
65°C extracted ββ ββ -D-glucan 
Exo β -1,4 
glucosidase 
Endo β -1,3:1,4 
glucanase 
40°C extracted ββ ββ -D-glucan 
29 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
proline and glutamine.  As grain Total Nitrogen (TN) increases during grain 
development hordein becomes incorporated into the s torage protein matrix in a 
disproportionate fashion. 
 
Grains with high TN tend to have steely endosperms,  whilst mealy endosperms will 
contain less TN.  As described below, it is the qua lity of the packing of the mealy or 
steely endosperm that most influences proteolysis a nd grain modification, not 
enzyme concentration. 
 
 
The distribution and density of this protein matrix  differs with barley variety and 
growth conditions.  Excess fertilizer applied in the field can result in barley with a high 
protein content, mostly concentrated in the endospe rm protein matrix.  In grains with 
a dense protein matrix there are less “water-free” or air filled spaces than in a grain 
incorporating lower protein levels.   
 
/head2right Grains with a high proportion of air filled spaces  are known as mealy 
 
/head2right Grains with few air filled spaces, are known as st eely. 
 
 
Mealy grains allow rapid water penetration and unif orm hydration of the endosperm.  
This results in quicker and more uniform modificati on, producing superior quality 
malt.  Steely grains hinder endosperm hydration and  enzyme distribution, giving 
uneven modification and poor quality malt. 
 
.The enzymes responsible for proteolysis include: 
 
/head2right Endoproteases 
/head2right Exoproteases 
/head2right Carboxypeptidases 
During germination, the GA stimulated aleurone laye r synthesises and releases at 
least five endoproteases into the endosperm.  These  sulphydryl endoproteases 
attack internal protein bonds, whilst the exoprotea ses cleave bonds at the terminal 
chain ends.  The endoproteases hydrolyse the large protein molecules, releasing 
smaller polypeptides upon which the exoproteases ac t to produce smaller peptides 
and amino acids. 
 
The acid carboxypeptidases are located within the e ndosperm and their 
concentration increases throughout steeping and ger mination.  Carboxypeptidases 
cleave single amino acids from the carboxyl end (CO OH) of peptides, primarily 
during malting, but also to some extent during mashing. 
 
This enzymatic action during germination results in  the transformation of the 
insoluble nitrogen, much of which goes into solution on mashing and is recognised as 
the Total Soluble Nitrogen  (TSN) .  As germination progresses the level of TSN 
increases before declining, as a proportion is cons umed for continued plant growth.  
The ratio of the TSN: TN obtained from the malt is used as a measure of  
30 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
modification.  Typically during malting 40% of grai n TN is solubilised by the 
endoproteases and carboxypeptidases. 
 
The endo- and exoproteases are heat labile and are easily denatured and inactivated 
during kilning.  The carboxypeptidases are more hea t stable and survive kilning to 
continue with subdued activity during mashing.  As such, sufficient proteolysis must 
occur during germination.  
 
If adequate proteolysis does not take place the consequences can be drastic. 
The malt extract is reduced when the protein matrix  is not satisfactorily degraded to 
expose the starch granules for hydrolysis. If hydrolysis does not occur during malting, 
there will be a deficit of necessary enzymes during  mashing to cleave and release 
free amino acids ( Free Amino Nitrogen).  This FAN is essential for yeast growth a nd 
if deficient will cause problematic fermentations. Excessive proteolysis can lead to 
excessive amounts of amino acids and peptides in th e wash and a decrease in 
apparent fermentability. If the malt has been overm odified to the extent of excessive 
respiration loss as well as excessive proteolysis then spirit yield is also lost. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(e) Starch granules and granule modification 
 
During the malting process, degradation of the endo sperm starch is limited to 
preserve extract potential.  Approximately 10% of t he barley starch is hydrolysed to 
provide nutrition for the embryo.  The majority of this degraded starch is the small B-
Type granules that degrade more rapidly than the la rger A-Type, due to their 
increased surface area to volume ratio. 
 
Although this degradation of the small starch granu les contributes towards malting 
loss, it is somewhat fortuitous, as the small starch granules have higher gelatinisation 
temperatures than the large starch granules.  Durin g mashing ungelatinised starch 
will generate viscous worts that are difficult to s eparate. Their presence in the spent 
grains of an all malt distilling mash is indicative of under modification of the malt. 
 There are four major starch-degrading enzymes present in germinating barley. 
 
/head2right α -amylase 
/head2right β -amylase 
/head2right Limit dextrinase 
/head2right α -glucosidase 
All four enzymes are important in maximising the fe rmentable extract of distilling 
malts. 
Barley contains no α -amylase prior to germination and its synthesis and  release from 
the aleurone layer is dependent upon GA stimulation during steeping.  β -Amylase is  
KEYPOINT:  The combined action of proteolysis and β -D-glucan degradation renders the 
malt friable or “readily crushable”; this is due to  the break down of the rigid cell walls and 
protein matrix.  The friability of malt is often used as an indication of the extent of 
modification. 
 
31 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
present in barley within the endosperm and exists b ound to the proteins of the 
endosperm matrix.  This latent β -amylase is activated on release from the matrix by  
proteases / carboxypeptidases. 
 
α -Amylase slowly attacks ungelatinised starch during germination, but β -amylase can 
not.  α -Amylase breaks the starch down to smaller polymers  (liquefaction), whilst the 
β -amylase cleaves individual sugar monomers (sacchar ification).  This combined 
action is most effective during mashing and will be  dealt with in greater detail later on 
in the course. 
 
Limit dextrinase, existing in both bound and free forms, degrades branched dextrin 
(partially degraded starch granules) to smaller linear dextrins.   
α -Glucosidase degrades maltose to glucose providing immediate metabolic 
substrates for the embryo. 
 Limit dextrinase and α -glucosidase are heat labile but in low kilned distilling malts 
sufficient activity survives to make an important contribution to the fermentability of 
malt wort, especially during secondary conversion in the fermenting vessel.  α -
Amylase and β -amylase are to some extent heat labile, with a proportion lost during 
kilning.  β -Amylase is affected by heat more than α-Amylase. 
 
1A.3.3.3.1 Germination technology 
 
(a) Specifications for Germination Vessels 
 
At the end of steeping, the grain moves into the se cond phase of growth, signaled by 
chitting.  As the grain strives for further growth,  its oxygen requirements, to facilitate 
increased respiration, jump dramatically.  This dem and for oxygen cannot be met in 
the steep tank unless the malting plant is a combin ed steeping and germination 
vessel (SGV) or combined steeping, germination and kilning vessel (SGKV).   
 
If the chitting grain is left submerged in conventi onal the steep, it takes up too much 
water and effectively drowns.  The grain is therefo re, moved to germination 
chambers where its physical demands can be met more easily. 
 
There are various types of germination chambers in use around the world, but they 
all operate around similar principles: 
 
/head2right Controlling grain temperature. 
/head2right Maintaining at least 40% grain moisture. 
/head2right Turning and mixing of the grain. 
/head2right Supplying sufficient oxygen to the grain. 
 
 
The grain can be transferred or “cast” between the steeping tank and germination 
chamber as a slurry, or dry with spraying, to preve nt grain dehydration.  The grain is 
then spread out to form an even bed, on average between 1-3 metres in depth. The  
32 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
exceptions are SGV and SGKV maltings where the germ inating barley remains in 
situ  throughout the whole process.   
 
Throughout germination, it is essential that the gr ain bed is kept moist.  If the grain is 
allowed to dehydrate, modification will cease.  If the grain dehydrates, hydrolytic 
enzymes will be unable to progress throughout the e ndosperm, resulting in an under 
modified malt of poor quality that will cause serious brewhouse problems.   
 
The problem of dehydration is overcome by lightly s praying the grain bed with water.  
In addition, the malt is aerated with cool air, sat urated with moisture at 100% relative 
humidity.  Although the circulating air is at 100% humidity as it enters the grain bed, it 
is warmed removing the heat generated by grain resp iration.  This warming of the air 
decreases its relative humidity and is sufficient t o effect some water removal and 
therefore, dehydration of the grain.   
 
Bed aeration serves several purposes.  As well as h elping to maintain bed hydration, 
circulating air replenishes the supply of oxygen fo r the grain and purges out any CO 2 
that could stifle respiration.  By maintaining air circulation, cooling of the grain bed is 
also accomplished. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.12  A diagram of a circulating germination vessel, show ing the 
rakes.  Adapted from Hough et al. Malting & Brewing Science Vol.1 
(1982). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Figure 3.13  A diagram of a Saladin Box (germination chamber).  Adapted 
from Hough et al. Malting & Brewing Science Vol.1 (1982).  
 
 
(b) Turning the Grain 
 
Turners are initially used to lay down an even grai n bed after transfer from the 
steeping vessel.  The turners then run at regular i ntervals to augment aeration and 
cooling, by mixing the grain.  As the grain germina tes and the rootlets grow, they can 
become entangled.  These clumps of grain trap heat as they respire and can 
generate microclimates within the bed.  These are u ndesirable as they promote 
faster germination in localised areas of the grain bed, which could also promote 
microbial growth.  If unchecked, the grain within t his microclimate will malt quicker 
than the rest of the bed, attaining a more complete  state of modification, generating 
non-homogenous malt. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
Figure 3.14.  A schematic diagram of a Saladin Box. 
Air out Air in 
Re -circulating air  
Fan 
pushes 
humid air 
through 
grain bed 
Sprinklers increase moisture 
content of air 
Turners lift grain 
bed 
Grain bed 
34 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Turning the grain bed using helical screws, also lifts the bed to allow easier passage 
of the circulating air and hence more efficient cooling and CO 2 removal.  
 
Germination will typically last between 3-5 days, a t temperatures between 15-20° C.  
As germination proceeds, respiration within the gra in gains vigour, and by the end of 
the process the heat generated can result in the grain mass reaching temperatures of 
up to 22° C.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.15  A)  Schematic representation of a fully perforated dru m. The drum 
rotates mixing the germinating grain whilst air eme rges from the perforated central 
pipe.   
B)  Schematic representations of a Galland drum.  Air from perforated ducts, situated 
around the circumference of the drum, is exhausted through a central pipe. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.16  A schematic diagram of a Wanderhaufen system.  The grain is moved 
along the “street” as the turners move from positio n 1 (steeped grain) to position 4 
(fully modified grain). 
 
A) B) 
1 2 3 4 
Grain from 
steep 
Green malt to 
kiln 
Air flow  
35 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Controlling the temperature of germination towards these latter stages can become 
difficult.  If relying on cooling alone, temperatur e regulation could be lost altogether, 
forcing over modification of the grain and increasi ng malting losses.  In order to 
prevent this and apply more accurate restraints, th e grain is allowed to partially 
dehydrate.  This manipulated desiccation of the gra in is referred to as “withering”.  In 
combination, the air circulating through the grain bed can be enriched with CO 2, as it 
is re-circulated.  These combined actions stifles g rain respiration, growth and 
therefore grain modification, preparing the 
grain for kilning. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.17  A schematic diagram of a Tower maltings.   The grain 
progresses down through the tower, dropping through each floor with each 
process step. 
 
 
 
Steeping 
Germination 2 
Kilning 
De-culmning 
Germination 1 
Grain in 
Malt out 
36 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.3.3.3.2 Germination Control Parameters 
 
(a) Moisture Control 
Once the steeped grain has been cast samples are normally withdrawn and analysed 
by the laboratory for moisture content and growth c ounts.  If the moisture content is 
too low the batch can be sprayed  inside the vessel.  It should be noted that this 
technique of moisture adjustment does not necessari ly get the moisture into the 
centre of the endosperm where it is really needed a nd can also bring about 
excessive rootlet growth resulting in increased mal ting losses.  Conversely, if the 
moisture content of the cast grain is excessively h igh the bed can be turned  with the 
germination fan at maximum speed and air conditioni ng system off to remove some 
of the excess moisture.  If either spraying or wate r removal is necessary then the 
steeping cycle is wrong and must be adjusted for subsequent batches. 
 
Once the initial moisture content is at the correct  level (45 - 47%) it is important that 
this moisture is maintained.  Humidified air is the refore blown through the growing 
green malt.  Even so, the grain moisture will fall by roughly 0.5% per day of 
germination due to the heat generated by the growin g malt itself and the water 
expelled by the grain in its biochemical respiration processes. 
 
 
(b) Effect of Moisture on Modification 
In general, malt modification is directly proportio nal to moisture content; i.e. 
increased moisture gives increased rate of modifica tion.  There is a limit to this since 
at 50% moisture the grain is killed by drowning.  I t must be borne in mind that high 
green malt moisture also increases the rate of resp iration, i.e. the grain grows 
vigorously using up valuable sugars, generating hea t, CO 2 and rootlets resulting in 
increased malting loss and consequently less malt p roduced per tonne of barley 
steeped. 
 
 
(c) Effects of Temperature on Germination 
In general, malt modification is directly proportio nal to temperature, i.e. increase the 
temperature and the rate of modification increases. 
 
 
(d) Effects of Temperature on Enzyme Development 
A very complex network of biochemical reactions is involved in modification and the 
maltster must be aware that some of these reactions  are significantly inhibited by 
increased temperature.  Each enzyme has a specific optimum temperature  for its 
activity and an increase in temperature will increa se the activity of some enzymes 
and decrease the activity of others. 
 
Two of the most significant groups of enzymes in th e germination process are the 
proteases and amylases.   Remember that proteases are enzymes that break dow n 
protein to soluble amino acids.  The extent of this  is measured by the SNR (soluble 
nitrogen ratio)  in that a high level of protease activity results i n a high SNR.  
Amylases  are enzymes responsible for breaking down starch into sugar. 
37 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Both proteases and amylases are formed within the g rain during germination.  Their 
rates of development, however, are affected differe ntly by temperature at the start of 
germination. 
/head2right high temperature start suppresses protease activit y and 
/head2right low temperature start enhances protease activity 
 
(e) Effect of Temperature on Rate of Modification 
As both these enzyme systems are so important in ma lting, a compromise  situation 
has to be found depending on the customer's malt sp ecification.  For example, a 
distiller requires high levels of soluble nitrogen in the wort, indicating that the protein 
matrix in the endosperm has been sufficiently broke n down, whereas there is usually 
an excess of amylase.  For this reason, moderate-lo w germination temperatures 
should be used to enhance protease activity. 
 
(f) Air-on and Air-off Temperatures 
In practice, the air-on  temperature (air temperature below grain bed) is co ntrolled.  It 
is important, however, that the air-off temperature  (air temperature above grain bed) 
is monitored and reacted to.  When malting vigorous  grain it is important to keep the 
growth under control.  If the differential between below bed and above bed 
temperatures is too great then detrimental effects,  such as moisture loss, uneven 
malt, increased malting loss,  can occur. 
 
Conversely, if the grain is slow to start, i.e. abo ve bed and below bed temperature 
differential is too small; action must be taken imm ediately in order to encourage 
germination and modification rate.  This temperatur e differential  can be between 1.5 o 
and 4 oC depending on individual barley and malt requirement s.  Control of 
temperature is achieved by a combination of several factors. 
 
(g) Control of Temperature 
Fresh air at ambient temperature and humidity is dr awn into the system by the 
germination fan.  The air is fully humidified by pa ssing through the spray chamber  of 
the conditioning system.  At most times of the year  the temperature of this fully 
conditioned air is lower than required so a portion  of exhaust air, which has passed 
through the grain bed and gained heat, is recirculated into the inlet air stream. 
 
By altering the proportion of air re-circulation th e air-on temperature can be closely 
controlled.  The air-on temperature is pre-set at the control system and the amount of 
exhaust recirculation automatically adjusted by a f eedback control system to a 
damper in the air duct. 
 
(h) Effects of High Summer Temperatures 
At certain times of the year, mid-late summer espec ially, the incoming ambient air is 
very warm.  No exhaust air is recirculated back int o the system and the air-on 
temperature can still be too high and out of contro l.   Unfortunately, older malting 
plants were not originally intended to work through out the summer months, as this 
was traditionally the "silent" or maintenance perio d.  Modern maltings install 
refrigeration  equipment in order that the germination temperature  can be effectively 
controlled all year round. Another technique used t o prevent the germination 
temperature going out of control is to turn the bed. 
 
38 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.3.3.3.3  Physiological and biochemical changes during germination 
                   influencing malting loss 
 
During germination the grain will develop an acrosp ire and rootlets.  Normally the 
rootlets can be expected to grow between 1.5 – 2 ti mes the length of the grain.  This 
constitutes a malting loss of approximately 4 – 7%.   This loss may be reduced by 
manipulating the processing conditions, for example , temperature, duration, moisture 
content, and carbon dioxide concentration within th e malt bed. However these 
conditions also affect enzyme synthesis and modific ation so a balance has to be 
struck so that enzyme synthesis and endosperm modif ication are optimised with 
minimum malting loss. This is  summarised below. 
 
The maltster aims to control the formation of α- and β-amylase, proteolysis and 
degradation of β-glucans.  
  
(a) α-Amylase 
/head2right This does not exist in unmalted barley. 
/head2right The level increases with germination. 
/head2right The amount of α-amylase produced varies with barley variety. 
/head2right It is stimulated by higher moisture content (e.g. 46% moisture and a 
germination temperature of 12 oC favour synthesis). 
 
 
(b) β-Amylase 
/head2right Exists in umalted barley in an inactive form. 
/head2right The amount of β-amylase produced varies with barley variety. 
/head2right Activation requires proteolysis, is linked to embr yo activity and respiration. 
/head2right It is stimulated by an average moisture content (e .g. 43% moisture and lower 
germination temperatures). 
 
 
(c) Proteolysis 
/head2right Higher moisture content and lower germination temp eratures stimulate 
production. 
 
/head2right Elevated germination temperatures decrease activit y. 
 
 
(d) Solubilisation and Breakdown of β-Glucans 
 
Breakdown of β-glucan cell walls is essential to achieve fast wor t filtration. The 
enzymes needed to solubilise and breakdown the β-glucans develop slowly during 
the malting process and they are sensitive to GA sy nthesis.  An intensive malting 
process, for example, high moisture content and a g ermination temperature of 19 oC 
maintained for long periods, favours the degradation of the β-glucans.  
  
An outline of β-glucan degradation in the cell wall is shown below. 
39 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
β-glucan in the cell wall 
 
β-glucan solubilase 
(a carboxypeptidase) 
 
High MW soluble but viscous glucan 
 
Endo β-1,3-glucanase 
 
Endo β-1,4-glucanase 
 
Barley endo β-glucanase 
 
 
 
Smaller water soluble molecules (including glucose) 
 
 
 
 
1A.3.3.3.4 Control of Malting Loss 
 
 During the malting process, barley respires produc ing energy for growth.  As the 
grain respires it consumes and expends integral sub strates (e.g. carbohydrates and 
protein) in the production of new tissue, CO 2, water and heat energy.  This 
consumption depletes the extract available to the d istiller, recognised as a reduction 
in the total dry weight of the grain and represents  malting loss.  Malting loss is also 
enhanced as materials leach from the grain during steeping.   
 
Typical malting loss is described in Table 2, below. 
 
 
 
Table 2.  Typical malting loss expressed as percentage dry weight of the grain. 
 
Malting Loss % Reduction in grain total 
dry weight 
Steeping 1% 
Rootlet production 3.5% 
Respiration 3% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
(a) Factors which affect malting loss 
 
In general, the longer the grain is allowed to germ inate and grow, the greater the 
malting loss will be. 
 
Reducing malting loss, however, works in opposition  to requirements of the maltster 
and brewer alike.  For trouble-free brewing, the ma lt must be sufficiently modified.  
To achieve good quality grain modification, the bar ley must have sufficient time to 
germinate.  If this is allowed, extract potentials are reduced because the embryo is 
allowed to grow, not to mention the increased capit al expenditure associated with an 
extended malting process. 
 
/head2right For example, low germination temperatures restrict  embryo growth (reducing 
malting losses) but slow the synthesis, release, an d diffusion of hydrolytic 
enzymes throughout the endosperm (elongating proces s time).  However, 
modification will be thorough. 
 
/head2right High germination temperatures will accelerate modi fication of the grain, 
reducing process times.  Malting loss can be reduce d if the period that the 
embryo utilises nutrients from the endosperm is sho rtened.  However, the 
quality of the malt produced will be inferior, with  incomplete and non-
homogenous modification. 
 
 
KEYPOINT:  The control of germination aims always to achieve a balance  between 
the degree of modification and malting loss. 
 
 
41 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.3.3.4 The Malting Process – Kilning  
 
1A.3.3.4.1 Purpose of kilning 
 
At the end of germination, the modified barley, now  termed “green malt” (unkilned 
malt) has been manipulated to achieve the maltster’ s and brewer’s specifications.  
These grain characteristics must now be fixed to av oid any deleterious alterations 
that may occur before the brewery can take delivery  of their malt.  Kilning effectively 
serves two purposes: 
 
1. To halt and capture the biological activity of t he germinating grain at a point of 
optimum enzyme yield and endosperm modification. 
 
2. To reduce the moisture content of the green malt  to a level at which it can be 
safely stored to avoid deterioration and microbial infection. 
 
 
1A.3.4.3.2 The Physical Process of Kilning 
 
Kilning reduces the moisture content of the grain, which, at the end of germination is 
between 42 – 48%.  A final grain moisture level of approximately 3 – 5% is achieved 
by the end of kilning.  Kilning of the grain is als o responsible for the characteristic 
colour and flavour of malt.  This requires intense heating, which conflicts with the 
need to preserve essential enzymatic activity in the grain. 
 
Enzymes are considerably more heat stable when the malt is dry.  Kilning objectives 
can therefore be accomplished with a drying regime that first excludes the majority of 
moisture at relatively subdued temperatures.  Secon dly, intense heating is used to 
obtain final moisture removal, and colour/flavour production. 
 
Kilning consumes some 75% of the total energy utilised in malting and must therefore 
be operated at maximum efficiency.  This dictates t hat the warm air (used to dry the 
grain) leaves the kiln satisfying its maximum moist ure carrying capacity.  This may 
not always be accomplished or even desired. 
 
Kilns are similar in design to germination chambers  and in fact some maltings utilise 
vessels in which the two process steps are carried out in the one vessel - 
Germination Kilning Vessels (GKVs) or in some cases all three processes (SGKVs). 
 
Within the kiln, the green malt is loaded onto one or more perforated floors, through 
which heated air can be driven (by fan) upwards thr ough the grain bed to effect 
drying.  If there is more than one floor, the heate d air from the lower level is 
rejuvenated with additional flow to heat the bed ab ove, resulting in vast economic 
savings.  As with germination, the grain bed is regularly turned securing homogenous 
drying and consistent quality malt.   
 
There are two stages incorporated in the drying process for distilling malts. 
 
1. Free Drying (or pre-break). 
2. Forced drying. 
42 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Since distilling malts are generally dried to 4-5% moisture they do not need to be 
cured to generate colour. 
 
(a) Free Drying 
 
Initially, water can be easily removed from the moi st grain using low temperatures 
(50 – 60° C) if combined with high volume airflow (R elative Humidity [RH] = 95%).  
During free drying, water diffuses through the grai n to its surface and is absorbed by 
the warm air passing through the bed.  The action o f water removal from the grain 
cools the malt (due to the latent heat of evaporati on). The physics of free drying is 
sometimes referred to as  psychometry and psychomet ric tables are available to the 
maltster showing the drying capacity of ambient air  raised to different temperatures 
and the equilibrium temperature at which the applie d air becomes saturated with 
water. The equilibrium temperature is also the temp erature of the grain during free 
drying. For distilling malts the equilibrium temper ature should be kept as low as 
possible while still maintaining an economic drying  rate. Often the internal grain 
temperature will be 30° C lower than that of the air -on temperature.  This removal of 
moisture at low temperatures ensures the maximal survival of enzymes. 
Equally the free drying period should not be too long since the undried malt at the top 
of the bed is exposed to  warm saturated air which will “stew” the malt. Stewing 
arises when the saturated air passing through the b ed prevents evaporation and 
therefore cooling of the malt – in effect stewing i t.  Such conditions are avoided by 
increasing the water carrying capacity of the air b y increasing its temperature and/or 
flow volume. A balance must be found between minimu m temperature to preserve 
enzyme activity and maximum air flow to maximize dr ying capacity. If the air-on 
temperature is too high, “stewing” can generate an excess of sugar and amino-acids 
in the endosperm which will form coloured melanoidi n complexes during the later 
stages of kilning. These must be avoided at all cos ts in distilling malt since they are 
indicative of lost fermentable extract. 
 
Typically the “air-on” temperature for distilling m alt is  about 60-65 0C for the whole of 
the free drying period. For an ambient temperature of say 10 0C at 80% RH produces 
malt with break-point moistures in the region 23-25 % and a temperature of about 24-
25 0C. This is the so called break point at which there  is no more free water on the 
grain surface. Ideally the break-point should be re ached as quickly as possible (say 
10 – 12 hours in a 24hr kiln cycle) This requires t he kiln to have as shallow a bed as 
possible and maximum air flows (ca. 50 m 3/min/tonne malt). For high enzymic malt 
with higher moisture content (up to  50% moisture) lower air on temperatures (50 – 
60 0C) and shallower bed depths may be required. The lower the kiln deck loading the 
higher the air flow so that high diastase malt with  a moisture of 5-6% can be kilned 
within the same time cycle as normal distilling mal t. This however is a costly exercise 
and despite the lower temperatures involved, grain distilling malt is more expensive 
to make. The alternative is to use green malt with no kilning (see below) 
 
The inherent nature of malt kilning, maintaining “a ir-off” relative humidity at 95 – 
100% RH makes it an inefficient and wasteful process.   
 
Other inevitably sources of energy loss are: 
43 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
/head2right Imperfect fuel combustion 
/head2right Losses in heating the kiln structure 
/head2right Heat lost from the kiln 
 
 
KEYPOINT:  Malt enzymes are damaged when moist malt is expose d to high 
temperatures.  To protect the enzymes and also to m inimise energy costs, drying 
starts with the air temperature at about 60 oC and then raised at later stages.  The 
design of the cycle varies according to the type of malt. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.18.  A schematic representation of a two-tier kiln.  Ambient air is drawn 
in and passed to the primary heat exchanger (1).  T he heated air is drawn through to 
the secondary heat exchanger (2) and blown beneath the floor of the primary grain 
bed as the “air-on” (3).  The “air-off” from the fi rst grain bed (4) is drawn off and 
reheated, supplemented with additional air (5) and transferred to the secondary grain 
bed as “air-on” (6).  The “air-off” from the second ary grain bed (7) is re-circulated to 
join the incoming ambient air at the primary heat exchanger. 
 
A= Green malt in. B= Kilned malt out. 
1 
2 
3 
4 5 6 
7 
A 
B
Heat exchanger  
Fan  
Air flow  
Rakes  

44 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
(b) Forced Drying 
 
Grain surface moisture and that in the outermost la yers is soon depleted during free 
drying.  Moisture must then diffuse to the surface of the grain from the centre, an 
increasingly exhaustive process.  As the grain drie s it shrinks reducing the internal 
distance that the residual moisture must diffuse be fore reaching the surface.  
However, the grains total surface area is also dimi nished, restricting the rate of 
evaporation.   
 
The efficiency of the process declines as a result of the change in surface moisture 
levels with the “air-off” exiting the kiln carrying  less than maximal water levels (i.e. not 
fully saturated at 95-100% RH).  Consequently, the “air-on” temperature and flow rate 
are suitably modified; the temperature is increased  (70° C) and the airflow is reduced. 
For distilling malts the post break air can be reci rculated immediately and reheated 
from 40 0C to 70 0C thereby restoring its drying capacity. This is po ssible because 
there is no requirement for high temperature curing  as in brewing malts so early 
recirculation provides significant energy savings. Forced drying is also more 
temperature dependant than air-flow dependant so th at fan speeds can be  reduced 
giving further economies.  
 
Re-circulation stages continue as grain moisture dr ops to 10-12%.  Below 10% 
moisture only “bound” water remains.  Bound water i s associated with the 
macromolecules of the kernel (mainly attached to st arch and β -glucans by hydrogen 
bonds).  This point in the process is signalled whe n the “air-off” temperatures 
suddenly start to rise approaching the “air-on” tem perature. This is the equilibrium 
point at which no further drying can take place wit hout a further increase in air-on 
temperature.  
For average ambient conditions in the UK the equili brium moisture for 70 0C is 4.5 -
5.0% 
 
0
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
 
                                      Time (hours) 
 
Fig. 3.19 Kiln Chart for  Distilling Malt  on a 24hr Cycle 
                                       Malt moisture removal:  45% to 5% 
                                       Initial Air-on Temperature: 60 0C 
                                       Post break air on Temperature: 70 0C 
45 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
KEYPOINT:  It is important to remember that, in kilning, diff erent layers of the malt 
bed are at different stages of drying.  The driest layer will be at the bottom of the bed 
and will have reached the forced-drying phase while  the upper layers are still in the 
free drying phase.  The break point  (exhaust air at less than 100% RH) only comes 
when the whole malt bed has completed its forced dr ying phase.  The drying front  
gradually moves up through the malt bed until the b reak is reached and the air-off 
temperature above the bed starts to rise. 
 
During kilning moisture is removed from 45% to abou t 4.5% when the dried malt is 
stable. Once kilned, the malt is rapidly cooled wit h dry air and then screened to 
remove and separate the undesirable brittle rootlet s (or culmns) before they can pick 
up moisture.  The cool malt can then be conveyed to  storage silos where it will often 
be stored for up to a month.  This allows the moist ure content to equilibrate within the 
grain and throughout the whole malt population 
 
 
 
 
(c) Peated malt and peating technology 
 
 
During the early stages of kilning, peat may be bur ned, so that the reek (smoke) is 
absorbed by the drying malt. Peated malt is used in  the production of certain Scotch 
Whiskies, particularly those distilled on the island of Islay.  
 
Peat is decayed plant material that has formed over  thousands of years. It is 
generally found in wetlands areas. The type of peat  formed depends on the plants 
involved (grasses, heathers and moss) and the locat ion (inland, maritime). e.g. Islay, 
Orkney, Scottish Mainland. 
Peat is used during barley kilning as a flavour sou rce, not as a heat source. The 
location at which the peat was obtained, and its me thod of use strongly affect the 
flavour of the spirit produced. 
46 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
                        
                                    Fig 3.20.  Peating of distilling malt  
 
Legend:  
1.  Ash pit with air inlet 
2. Grate loaded with >1m depth graded peat (ca. 5cm  diam.) 
3. Burning zone (high temp. >1000 0C) 
4. Pyrolysis zone (medium temp. 300 – 500 0C) 
5. Drying zone (Low temp. 60 – 70 0C) 
6. Peat loading port 
7. Spark arrestors 
8. Peat reek duct (negative pressure ca -1in to -2 in. SWG) 
9. Primary kiln air inlet to heat exchanger 
10. Heat exchanger (delivering air at 60 - 70 0C) 
11. Kiln air fan 
12. Pressurised air plenum (homogeneous mix of peat reek and drying 
air) 
13. Malt bed 
14. Kiln exhaust  
                                                                                                 
During kilning, the peat is burned avoiding flaming , to produce an acidic smoke, the 
peat reek. It is burned during the early stages of kilning, so that the combustion 
products adsorb to and are absorbed by the malt. Th ese effects happen in the range 
45-20% moisture( i.e during the pre break-point per iod of kilning when free water on 
the surface of the malt grains can absorb peat reek  constituents). Careful control of 
combustion temperatures is necessary to achieve the  required level of peating. The 
best results are achieved when the peat is allowed to smoulder without excessive  
47 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
flames in a deep bed (>1m). Even burning and even f low of combustion gases 
through the bed are best controlled by using partly  milled peat. An average peat 
granule size of about 5cm without excessive “dross”  is ideal. 
 Peatiness is caused by a spectrum of phenolic comp ounds which can be destroyed 
if the peat bed becomes too hot (>400 0C). The amount of  phenolic compounds 
within the final malt may be up to 80 ppm. The main  phenolic compounds are phenol, 
ortho-,meta-, and para-cresol, xylenol and para eth yl phenol which are generated by 
the pyrolytic degradation of peat humins. Smaller a mounts of eugenol and guiacol 
are also produced. While the latter phenolics do no t influence the overall 
concentration of phenols (mostly phenol and cresol)  their flavour threshold is much 
lower and hence they are very important contributors to whisky flavour. 
 
 When burned in a deep bed of peat with a moisture content  in the range 40 - 60%, 
combustion air is drawn through the bed by the nega tive pressure created by the 
malt kiln fan and only the peat at the bottom of th e bed is fully combusted at high 
temperature (1000 – 1500 0C). The excess moisture, the water of combustion an d hot 
combustion gases combine to effect a pyrolysis and partial steam distillation of the 
remaining peat. The layer of peat immediately above  the burning zone is essentially 
“coked”  to produce the reek. The top layer of peat  cools the reek as the free 
moisture in the peat evaporates. If the burning zone can be kept horizontal to the bed 
surface the process can be made semi-continuous by adding more peat onto the top 
layer while simultaneously de-ashing the bottom layer.  
 
The peat reek entering the kiln at the start of the  process is therefore an aerosol at 
about the same temperature of the kilning air. The amount of peat used is such that 
“break-through” of the high temperature burning zon e coincides with the malt kiln 
break-point. Thus the maximum amount of reek is generated and adsorbed pre-break 
and the remaining “coked” peat is allowed to burn f reely to augment the heating of 
the post-break  kiln air.  
 
Unfortunately the high organic nitrogen content of some peats, together with a high 
combustion temperature, can lead to very high level s of oxides of nitrogen appearing 
in the kiln air so leading to high concentrations o f nitrosamine in the finished malt. 
When peat was used as a primary means of heating, t he nitrosamine levels in some 
malt whiskies may have been excessively high so the practice of burning peat at high 
temperatures no longer takes place. The low tempera ture process does mean that 
there is now a higher relative concentration of phe nols and cresols in the peat smoke 
since they are driven off at temperatures below their flash point.  
 
Very high concentrations of phenol/cresol (ca 80ppm ) can be adsorbed onto malt by 
keeping malt at or slightly below the break point a nd continuing to smoke for 
prolonged periods (>12 hours) without primary heating. In this way the drying process 
is stopped at moistures of 20 – 25% so allowing con tinued adsorption without 
stewing the malt. When sufficient peat has been con sumed the drying of the malt is 
recommenced at post break air-on temperature until the malt moisture is around 5%. 
 
 
48 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.3.3.4.3 Kiln Design and Technology 
 
. 
(a) Energy consumption 
 
Kilning is the final process in the preparation of malt.  It is a drying operation that is 
carried out at carefully controlled temperatures un til the malt has reached the desired 
moisture content.  If steeping is regarded as the m ost critical phase of malting in 
terms of achievement of malt modification,  it is kilning which is the most critical phase 
in terms of operating efficiency and costs. Older k ilns tend to be square, whereas 
newer kilns are usually round.  Nowadays, both inco rporate heat recovery systems, 
having the capacity to recirculate air  in the latter stages of kilning when the air from 
the grain bed still has drying capacity.  They also  have heat exchangers to recover 
energy in the early stages of kilning when warm saturated air is being exhausted 
In malting plants where measures to improve energy utilisation have not been carried 
out, kilning can represent around 90% of the energy  used.  Even when extensive 
work has been carried out to produce the most cost effective kilns the energy 
requirement of this process will still represent so me 75-85% of the total energy 
maltings use.  Kilning is, therefore, important bot h in terms of product quality and 
commercial viability. 
 
 
 
 
(b) Modern Kilning Technology  
 
Developments in kilning technology over the past 15 years or so have been driven by 
a necessity to reduce operating costs.  The main ar eas that have been developed 
are automation of loading/discharging and heat recovery. 
 
Mechanical loading gives reduced fuel consumption a s a result of a more evenly and 
less compacted grain bed.  In addition to reduced f uel consumption a mechanically 
loaded bed can give significant reductions in elect rical consumption  because of the 
lighter kiln loading.  
 
Kilns loaded using a manually operated belt-thrower  system relies heavily on the skill 
of the men operating it.  By far the most significa nt reductions in fuel consumption 
have been achieved by the installation of heat recovery systems.   
 
(c) Indirect and Direct Kiln Firing 
 
In traditional kilning (and still used for some malts for distilling), kilns are directly fired, 
i.e. the products of combustion of the fuel pass up  through the malt bed.  This results 
in a high SO 2 content and low wort pH, (and is considered to hav e beneficial effects 
on whisky flavour). 
 
With indirect firing,  the incoming air passes through a radiator heated w ith hot water 
from the boiler.   The introduction of indirect fir ing actually reduces the efficiency of 
the kiln because of heat losses.  This is because t he kiln air is heated using a boiler 
that loses 15-20% of its energy up the stack. 
49 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.3.3.4.4 Kilning Biochemistry 
 
(a) Enzyme denaturation 
The skill of kilning is concerned with the preserva tion of enzyme activities.  
Inactivation of the enzymes is a result of denatura tion (or protein coagulation).  In 
addition to the denaturation of enzyme proteins, a proportion of the endosperm 
protein is also coagulated, and this will not dissolve in the wort.  . 
 
The essential hydrolytic enzymes which survive kiln ing and can  act during mashing 
are: 
 
 Most heat stable 
Carboxypeptidase  
α-Amylase  
β-Amylase  
Beta glucanase  
Limit dextrinase  
Protease,Alpha 
glucosidase 
 
Least heat stable 
KEYPOINT:  If high enzyme activity is required in the finishe d malt then low 
temperatures (especially early in the kilning cycle ) are used especially for grain 
distilling malts. 
 
  
(b) Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) 
 
Nitrosoamines are carcinogenic compounds generated during malting formed by the 
reaction of amines and nitrogen oxides. Currently s trict regulations are implemented; 
stating that no more than 2 ppb NDMA can be present  within the malt.  NDMA is 
created through the interaction of the precursor ho rdenine (almost exclusively found 
in the rootlets) and nitrous oxides (NO x) during kilning.  The nitrous oxides are a 
result of the oxidation of nitrogen in the air when  sulphur deficient fuels are 
combusted. 
 
To combat NDMA production many maltings now use ind irect kilning.  In these kilns, 
air is heated using heat exchangers to prevent the NO x containing flue gases, from 
the burning fuel, entering the kiln and making contact with the malt.  Alternatively SO 2 
or elemental sulphur can be added to the burners in  the kiln when heating air used 
for drying the malt.  When fuel containing SO x (e.g. SO 2 and SO 3) is burnt, the 
problem of NDMA production is averted. 
 
However, two problems still remain.  The first is t hat even when indirectly kilning, 
high NO x levels can be present in the ambient air in many l ocations, originating from 
cars, factories and home heating systems.  This wil l provide opportunity for NDMA 
production.  Secondly, the reaction of SO 3 and H 2O produces H 2SO 4.  This sulphuric 
acid can corrode the malting plant. 
 
50 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.3. Malting  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil.1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
To summarise reductions in nitrosamine formation are achieved in a number of ways: 
 
/head2right Burning sulphur or use of heavy fuel oil with a hi gher sulphur content. 
 
/head2right Use of burners with low flame temperatures. 
 
/head2right Use of indirect kilning i.e. where the products of  combustion do not come into 
contact with the malt. 
 
/head2right Use of low temperature/high airflow profiles. 
 
/head2right Any factors leading to reduced protein breakdown. 
 
 
 
 
1A.3.4.  Summary of the Malting Process  
 
The table below details the changes that occur during the malting process 
 
Parameter Barley During Germination  Malt 
Moisture. about 12% after drying About 45-50% after  
steeping, falling back to 
44-45% pre-kilning 
4-5% after kilning normal 
distilling malt. 5-6% for 
high DP 
Extractable 
carbohydrate.  
Virtually zero because 
the starch is protected. 
Very high because the 
starch granules have 
been released. They 
are now accessible to 
enzymes that convert 
starch into sugar. 
Kilning does not change 
the level of extractable 
carbohydrate but it does 
fix  it by reducing moisture 
and stopping germination. 
Colour. Very low. Very low. Colour is produced when  
sugars and soluble protein 
react together at high 
temperature.  
An increase in colour  
indicates overkilning in 
distilling malts. 
Protein. Malting barleys have 
low protein levels, 
equivalent to about 
1.5% nitrogen except 
high DP which can be 
up to 2%  
The overall level of 
nitrogen does not 
change, but a lot of the 
protein is converted 
into a more soluble 
form (peptides and 
amino acids) by 
enzymic action during 
germination.  
Kilning does not change 
the nature of the proteins 
and carbohydrate but it 
does fix them by stopping 
germination. 
 