1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.8. Quality  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation  & 
Maturation 
 
Unit 2.8 – Quality  
 
2.8.1  Laboratory analytical techniques 
With the exception of alcoholic strength of the fin al product, the analyses outlined below 
are not essential for the production and marketing of distilled spirit beverages.  Although 
all could be useful in certain circumstances, they are not necessarily carried out 
routinely.   
 
Alcohol determination   Measurement of alcohol content is required at vario us stages 
of spirit production.  Officially the exact measure ment of alcoholic content of a spirit 
beverage  is determined as the density of a sample distilled in the laboratory, to 
eliminate the effect of dissolved solids, but norma lly that procedure is required only 
occasionally for the calibration, or confirmation o f the accuracy, of more convenient 
routine methods.  The two methods in common use are  hydrometers and electronic 
density meters, the latter based on resonant freque ncy of oscillation of the sample, 
which is related to density.  Provided the correct hydrometer is used, i.e. calibrated for 
maximum accuracy in the range of alcoholic strength  of interest, both methods provide 
the accuracy of +/- 0.1% which is required for prod uction and revenue purposes.  Also, 
an electronic density meter can be fitted in-line t o provide a continuous record of alcohol 
strength. 
 
Gas-liquid chromatography   Depending on the analysis, the injected sample can be 
liquid spirit, head-space vapour or material extrac ted by a suitable solvent for the 
compound(s) of interest.  Alternatively sample preparation could be by steam distillation, 
e.g. of the phenols associated with peated malt for some Scotch malt whiskies. 
 
Although GLC can be used for some routine measureme nts of ethanol, its typical 
accuracy of +/- 1% is not precise enough for excise  records or confirmation of bottling 
strength.  However, GLC is suitable for a wide rang e of analyses of volatile compounds, 
and non-volatile compounds can also be measured if quantitative conversion to volatile 
derivatives is possible, but for the latter it is m ore convenient in practice to use.HPLC.  
The GLC column is normally narrow-bore glass or sta inless steel tubing 2 or 3 m in 
length, coiled to fit the accurately attemperated o ven of the apparatus.  With specific 
packing, flow rate of carrier gas and oven temperature (or accurately programmed  
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.8. Quality  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
increase of temperature), when the system has been calibrated with known amounts of 
each compound of interest, the residence time between injection and detection at the far 
end of the column identifies the compound.  The ine rt carrier gas is usually nitrogen, but 
for some purposes argon or helium is preferable. Th e size of the peak (to be strictly 
accurate, the area under the peak) of the detector response indicates the amount.  An 
internal standard, a compound related to those bein g analysed but which would not be 
present naturally, must be added at a  known amount  to each sample to recognise and 
compensate for slight variations in residence time and/or detector response.  As an 
alternative to inert packing, modern capillary tubing columns use the inner surface of the 
tube itself is the support.  A flame ionization det ector, which measures the effect of the 
congener vapour on burning hydrogen, detects the vo latile acids, alcohols and esters 
from fermentation (although not all could be run in  the same column if different packing 
is required).  Specialized packings and detection s ystems, e.g. electron capture, are 
required for diacetyl and sulphur compounds, includ ing dimethyl sulphide and 
polysulphides.  The standard GLC system outlined ab ove is suitable for most 
fermentation congeners, e.g. as back-up for sensory  assessment of either new or 
mature spirit, but coupled to a mass-spectrometer ( as GC-MS) can measure a much 
wider range of volatile compounds because of the gr eater versatility of the detection 
system..    
 
Non-volatile congeners by HPLC or TLC.  The non-volatile compounds (e.g. sugars, 
tannins, lignin degradation products and other phen olic compounds) associated with 
maturation are more conveniently analysed by High-P erformance (or High-Pressure) 
Liquid Chromatography or Thin Layer Chromatography.   Both methods are more 
sophisticated versions of the original method of se paration of coloured compounds by 
paper chromatography..  For HPLC the sample is chro matographed in the liquid phase 
through a column could be a miniature version of th at used for GLC, or perhaps a small 
cylindrical column, and the separated components of the mixture are usually detected by 
UV fluorescence.  As with GLC, identification is by  elution time and quantification by the 
extent of detector response.   
 
For TLC, metal foil or glass plates are coated with  a thin layer of inert material, often 
silica.  As with paper chromatography, samples are spotted on the start line.  Then the 
plate is placed vertically in the solvent trough wi th the edge beside the start line just 
immersed (but, as in paper chromatography, not the start line itself).  After elution, which 
is much faster than with paper, the plate is spraye d with reagent mixture (subsequent 
heating in an oven may be necessary) and the spots identified by their position and 
perhaps also by their colour reaction with the reag ent.  Although precise measurement 
is not possible, amount can be estimated reasonably  accurately by intensity of colour 
and possibly also by the size of the spot, in compa rison with standards run 
simultaneously,. 
and preferaby on the same plate 
 
It may happen that several components of a mixture run so close to each other that 
clear separation is impossible.  Although only a si ngle sample can then be analysed, 
one spot at one corner of the plate can be chromatographed as before, and its partly- 
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.8. Quality  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
separated components, at this stage still invisible , are then fully separated by 
chromatography with a different solvent running at 90 o to the first, and then sprayed and 
heated as before.  This description is necessarily vague since there are so many 
variations of plate coating, elution solvent and re agent, but one useful application of 2-
dimensional TLC is the separation and measurement o f the lignin degradation products 
associated with the maturation process. 
  
Nitrosodimethylamine  NDMA, a suspected carcinogen, became a problem in t he 
brewing and malt whisky industries in the 1970s wit h the introduction of natural gas fuel 
for malt kilning.  Its higher burning temperature c reated oxides of nitrogen (NO X) which 
in turn caused the formation of NMDA.  Also, natural gas burns without formation of SO 2, 
which inhibits NO X formation. .  The problem could be solved by indir ect heating, but if 
direct heating by flue gas had to be used, heavy fu el oil has sufficient sulphur content to 
inhibit formation of NO X.  So NDMA analysis is seldom required now, but if necessary is 
by GLC of a directly injected sample of whisky and a thermal energy analyzer detector.  
Sensitivity < 1 g/litre is claimed, so ideally NDMA should not be d etected.  This is a 
particularly appropriate place to emphasise the COS HH requirements of chemical 
analyses.  Although the small amount of NDMA that m ay be present in the samples is 
safe, the pure chemicals used for preparation of standards are hazardous. 
 
Ethyl carbamate , also a suspected carcinogen, can occur in trace a mounts in all 
distilled beverages, created by thermal decompositi on during distillation of 
isobutyraldehyde cyanohydrin which is formed from n aturally occurring cyanide 
glycosides of plant origin during fermentation.  The problem was eliminated by (a) use of 
raw materials with low levels of CN precursors and (b) aeration during continuous 
distillation to prevent accumulation of cyanides in  the system, this to be done in the 
presence of sacrificial copper in stainless-steel s tills.   GC-MS of a directly injected 
sample is an appropriate method of analysis. 
 
 
2.8.2  Sensory analyses 
 
Because of the high alcohol content of potable spir its, flavour analysis by tasting is not 
often used, and is not used at all in some companie s.  Sensory analysis is normally by 
nosing, i.e. by aroma only, so panelists must be se lected on the basis of natural highly 
developed odour recognition, which is enhanced by r egular training.  Therefore trained 
panelists have a sensory threshold for aroma charac ters well below the average of the 
general public. 
 
The basic requirement for sensory analysis is a tra ined panel working in a room of 
consistent ambient temperature and free from distra cting odours.  Whether communal 
assessment takes place round the table or panelists  work in separate booths is the 
choice of individual companies and should not by it self have any effect on the 
significance of the results. Views on whether to pr ovide computer terminals to record 
individual responses directly, or written forms wit h the option of giving more detailed 
impressions when appropriate, also vary between companies.  For most types of test a  
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.8. Quality  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
minimum of ten trained panelists is necessary for s tatistical significance.  Decisions on 
blending could well be based on one person’s assess ment, but that is a different 
situation from the use of a sensory panel as an ana lytical technique.  Sensory 
assessment is believed to be most sensitive with po table spirit samples diluted to 20% 
abv with aroma-free water, perhaps distilled to ach ieve that ideal.  Samples of 25 ml in 
tulip-shaped nosing glasses are diluted with an equ al volume of water and left at 
ambient temperature for 30 min, each covered with a  watch glass, to allow aroma to 
develop in the head space.   
 
Difference tests 
Although there are many variations for specific pur poses, there are only two basic types 
of sensory test: difference and descriptive.  A dif ference test is precisely that: are the 
samples the same or different?  For statistical val idity a minimum 20 assessors is 
normally required, also there are various strategies for presenting the test samples. .The 
two most common types of difference tests for sensory analysis of spirits are (a) triangle, 
(b). A or not-A.  Several other variations are wide ly used for food, beer and wine but 
because of the number of samples involved are unsui table for spirits.  Even when 
working only by nosing, an assessor is normally lim ited to a maximum of 10 samples in 
total (or 12, in some establishments) to avoid sensory fatigue. 
 
A or not-A: A is a reference sample, and panelists are presented with that and a second 
which is either A again or one of the samples under  test.   And so on, with a succession 
of paired samples.  In the Triangle test  each person is given three samples, two of 
which are identical (either 2 reference, 1 test or 1 reference, 2 test).  For both methods, 
the intention is to determine if a statistically si gnificant difference can be detected.  It is 
also possible for panelists to comment on their per ception of the aroma of the samples, 
thus providing a simple form of descriptive test, b ut the results can never be as 
significant as from a test designed specifically fo r that purpose.  The triangle test is also 
ideal for assessing the sensory perception of panel ists, by discriminating between 
accurately prepared samples. 
 
Descriptive tests 
Such tests may be limited to describing the aroma c omponents, but normally it is useful 
to estimate of the strength of specific characters in the assessment.  A higher level of 
training is required than for difference tests: not  only must the panelists have highly 
developed sensory perception but they also require the ability to recognise, and 
describe accurately, specific aroma components.  Th erefore assessors are trained to 
use a standard vocabulary of descriptive terms, as first used in the wine and brewing 
industries.   
The flavour wheel developed by the Scotch Whisky Re search Institute is shown below 
as an example (Figure 2.8.1), but several more complex  variations for whiskies have  
subsequently been proposed, e.g. to include “spicy”  which did not appear in the SWRI 
flavour wheel..  Although there are numerous common  congeners from the fermentation 
and maturation processes, the aromas of brandy, rum  and whisky are sufficiently 
different to require specific “flavour wheel” stand ard terms for the various desirable and 
undesirable components of each.  Equivalent wheels exist for brandy, gin and rum, and  
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.8. Quality  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
presumably also for other spirit beverages with sufficiently complex aroma and flavour to 
justify such a descriptive presentation of the comp onent factors.  Note that Figure 2.8.1 
includes factors which are undetectable by nosing: the taste sensations sweet, sour, salt 
and bitter, and “mouthfeel” effects.  Also, “metall ic” in the “stale” sector and “glycerin” 
and “honey” in ”sweet-associated” are probably tast e rather than aroma sensations.                    
 
The flavour wheel for the mature final product is unnecessarily complex for new spirit, so 
a simplified version prepared within the company, p erhaps with no more than 12 named 
characters, is adequate for sensory work before the  start of maturation.  For similar 
reasons, with neutral spirit or vodka samples, eith er a difference test or a simple list of 
the few likely aroma characters is sufficient for sensory analysis. 
 
It is possible to relate most of the descriptive te rms of the flavour wheel to specific 
chemical compounds. Accurately prepared solutions o f such compounds can then be 
used for training and assessment of panelists.  Some examples are listed in Table 2.8.1.  
 
  
Figure 2.8.1.  Flavour wheel for mature whisky characters 
 
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.8. Quality  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Flavour profile.   In the simplest version, which originated with th e wine industry, the 
assessor(s) describe(s) the character of each sampl e using standard terminology.  The 
same system can be used with gin and matured spirit s, but because of its limited 
precision and reproducibility it is used more by amateur enthusiasts than by professional 
assessors. 
 
For a more accurate and reproducible assessment, a selection of sensory characters is 
scored on a 0 -10 scale.  In practice it is difficu lt to operate with more than 8 in a single 
assessment, but with a suitable choice of character s appropriate to the product a 
precise profile can be prepared.  The scores for a hypothetical Scotch malt whisky are 
presented in Figure 2.8.2, resembling a spider’s we b early in its construction, hence the 
term spider diagram.  Even though there are differe nces between each distillation and 
even each cask, the shapes of spider diagrams of in dividual Scotch malt and grain 
whiskies are remark-ably consistent.  Similar consi stency applies to specific brands of 
brandy, gin and rum.   To some extent, the characteristic spider diagram can be used for 
identification. However, legal disputes about the a uthenticity of a branded product are 
better resolved by GLC analysis, including ethanol content (to detect dilution), which 
gives a more detailed and precise profile of the fl avour congeners of the genuine and 
allegedly fraudulent products. 
 
Table 2.8.1.  Typical flavour wheel descriptors and reference compounds 
 
  Descriptor           Reference compound    
Buttery   Diacetyl 
Cooked vegetable  Dimethyl sulphide 
Earthy    Geosmin 
Fruity    iso-Amyl acetate 
Medicinal   o-Cresol 
Musty (mouldy)  2,4,6 Trichloroanisole 
Nutty    Oak lactone 
Pungent   Formic acid 
Rancid   n-Butyric acid (or Ethyl butyrate) 
Solvent   Ethyl acetate 
Spicy (clove)   Eugenol 
Sweaty   iso-Valeric acid 
Vanilla   Vanillin     
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.8. Quality  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
                
  
 
Figure 2.8.2 .  “Spider diagram” of a hypothetical new-make Scotch malt whisky . 
 
 
 
Trueness to type  can be assessed in various ways, according to the product.  GLC, as 
mentioned immediately above, could be used, but the  trained human nose is a much 
more sophisticated analytical instrument and normal ly decides for routine quality 
analysis.  The simplest assessment is “A or not A”,  a comparison with a standard 
sample shows identity, or not.  Problems arise when  it is “not A”, what has gone wrong?  
A spider diagram may identify the discrepancy, but equally well may not, since only a 
limited number of characteristics is assessed.  GLC  or HPLC may be used, but many 
congeners are significant to spirit quality well be low their detection levels by with these 
methods.  Expressed another way, there are many con geners which are undetectable 
by laboratory instruments when present at or near aroma threshold levels. The company 
must rely on the expertise of the sensory panel or the blender to put things right.  .   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.8. Quality  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
2.8.3  Quality Management 
 
Quality Assurance is the organisation and managemen t of tests and audits to ensure 
that quality standards are defined and the product is prepared so as to meet or exceed 
these standards consistently.  Typically the following factors are involved: 
•  Definition of requirements and responsibilities fo r quality of processes and 
materials 
•  Definition of the required properties of the produ ct 
•  Definition of  the materials and processes involve d 
•  Definition of the number and qualifications of per sonnel 
•  Assessment of factors affecting quality 
•  Defnition of quality assurance actions: education,  training and motivation; 
requirements for and methods of analyses (quality c ontrol); documentation of 
results 
•  Definition of responsibilities for quality assuran ce actions.   
 
Quality Assurance standards 
ISO 9000 is a family of standards for quality manag ement systems maintained by the 
International Standardization Organization and admi nistered by accreditation and 
certification bodies.  ISO 9001 is the internationa lly recognised standard for an 
organisation’s Quality Management.systems, incorpor ating all the activities associated 
with quality.  Basically there are two principal re quirements (a) a well-planned and well-
managed quality system and (b) documentary evidence that such a system exists and is 
operating properly   A company that has been indepe ndently audited and certified with 
ISO 9001 has proof that formalized business process es are being applied, although this 
does not necessarily guarantee the quality of the company’s products.   
The requirements in ISO 9001:2008 include 
•  a set of procedures that cover all key processes i n the company,  
•  monitoring processes to ensure they are effective;   
•  keeping adequate records;  
•  checking output for defects, with appropriate and corrective action where 
necessary;  
•  regularly reviewing individual processes and the q uality system itself for 
effectiveness; and  
•  facilitating continual improvement  
 
The quality policy is a formal statement from manag ement, closely linked to the 
business and marketing plan and to customer needs. The quality policy is understood 
and followed at all levels and by all employees. Ea ch employee needs measurable 
objectives to work towards.  Decisions about the qu ality system are based on recorded 
data and the system is regularly audited and evalua ted for conformance and 
effectiveness.  Records must show how and where raw  materials and products were 
processed, to allow products and problems to be tra ced back to their source.   ISO 9001 
stipulates a need to determine customer requirement s: that may not apply literally to the 
actual distilled spirits, but certainly it is necessary to create systems for communicating  
9 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.8. Quality  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
with customers about product information, enquiries , contracts, orders, feedback and 
complaints.  
 
Regularly reviews of performance are required, thro ugh internal audits and meetings. It 
is necessary to determine whether the quality system is working and what improvements 
can be made. Records must be kept of the procedures  and decisions for dealing with 
past problems, and for anticipating potential futur e problems, and monitoring their 
effective-ness.  Also required are documented proce dures for dealing with actual and 
potential problems involving suppliers or customers , or internal problems e.g. a faulty 
batch of product : how to deal with the cause of the problem and keep  records to use in 
improve-ment of the system in future.  
 
ISO 9001 can provide the basis, and the stimulus, f or Total Quality Management.  This 
involves an understanding by all staff of the advan tages of operating a strict 
documented quality assurance system at all levels, controlled by system auditing and 
management review.   TQM includes the following principles: 
•  Quality must be managed.  Management must be invol ved, and lead. 
Implementing TQM starts with top management and flows downward. 
•  Every employee has a customer and is a supplier  
•  Every employee is responsible for quality 
•  Problems must be prevented, not just corrected 
•  Quality must be measured 
•  The quality standard is defect-free 
•  Quality improvements must be continuous, and plann ed and organised 
accordingly 
 
A quality control system involves a variety of qual ity assurance techniques and co-
operation between all departments, to their mutual benefit.  Although the scope of TQM 
is much wider, NAMAS and HACCP are briefly describe d below as examples of the 
application of documented procedures to maintenance and improvement of standards. 
. 
National Accreditation of Measurement and Sampling (NAMAS) by the United Kingdom 
Accreditation Service (UKAS) means that testing and  calibration laboratories have been 
assessed against internationally recognised standar ds to demonstrate their 
competence, impartiality and performance capability .  All aspects or company operation 
can be evaluated: not only the laboratory methods a nd equipment and the final product, 
but also management systems or organisation.  Such accreditation forms part of the 
assessment for ISO 9001.  Also, accreditation by UK AS confirms that external 
consultant laboratory, certification or inspection services meet international accreditation 
standards.  
 
HACCP   The concept of Hazard Analysis and Critical  Control Points was invented to 
ensure the safety  of processed food and drink products. It is not co ncerned with 
sensory quality being out of specification since th at by itself is not a health hazard.  It is 
true that similar principles can be applied to main taining sensory quality, but that is not 
HACCP. 
10 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.8. Quality  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
The original purpose of HACCP was to ensure as near  as possible to 100% food safety 
on NASA space flights, but it quickly became adopte d for food and drink processing in 
general.  The important innovation of HACCP was tha t instead of quality checks on 
representative samples of the product, the manufacturing process itself was assessed to 
identify and eliminate hazards. It is not necessary  to monitor every step.  Only those 
steps where a significant hazard exists need to be considered as critical points for 
process control.  For potable spirits, CCPs will be mainly associated with packaging, e.g. 
mcrobiological quality of the dilution water and th e risk of broken glass or other foreign 
material in bottles are health or safety issues.  E xcept for compounds like ethyl 
carbamate, methanol and NDMA, any faults earlier in  the process, whatever their effect 
on sensory quality, do not make the product dangerous. 
 
As a first step a team must be set up with collecti ve expertise in all stages and aspects 
of the process, to decide the objectives of the plan and then set it in operation.  Although 
the precise details of the system can be different in each company, and perhaps even 
for each product within the company, there is gener al agreement that the principles of 
HACCP are:   
1.  Prepare a detailed flow diagram identifying every stage of the process.  Use both that 
diagram and on-site inspection to conduct a hazard analysis of the entire process.  
Prepare a list of steps in the process where potent ial hazards exist, and specify the 
preventative measures which are required. 
2.  Then consider which of these steps have to be d esignated as Critical Control Points. 
Figure 2.8.1 explains the reasoning for choice of C CPs.  A CCP for a later stage of the 
process may also be able to control a separate upst ream hazard, in which case the 
earlier CCP is redundant.  For operational efficien cy and plant-friendliness, unnecessary 
CCPs must be avoided.  Identify each CCP and the corrective action to be taken.         
3.  Establish critical levels for preventive measur es associated with each identified CCP.  
Each CCP will have one or more critical measures th at need to be properly applied to 
ensure prevention or elimination of hazards.  Each control measure must have critical 
levels as safety boundaries. 
4.  Establish CCP monitoring requirements and proce dures for using the results of such 
monitoring to adjust the process and maintain control. 
5.  For each CCP, establish corrective action to be  taken when monitoring indicates that 
there is a deviation from a critical limit. 
6.  Establish effective record keeping procedures f or the HACCP system.  The HACCP 
plan and associated support documents, including co rrective action records, must be on 
file and kept up-to-date. 
7.  Establish procedures to verify that the HACCP system is working smoothly. 
11 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation & Maturation: Unit 2.8. Quality  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.8.4.  “Decision tree” for specifying a Cri tical Control Point (CCP). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Further reading 
R. Aylott, Chapter 9, Whisky Analysis, in Whisky, T echnology, Production and 
Marketing, ed. I. Russell (Academic Press, 2003). 
Also UKAS/NAMAS websites 
 
 