1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 2: Fermentation, Distillation  & 
Maturation 
 
Unit 2.7 – Post-distillation Modification of Flavou r 
 
Maturation of spirit beverages  
 
Maturation of distilled spirits is the removal duri ng a period of storage of off-notes from 
raw materials and fermentation, and the development  of colour, fragrance, mellowness 
and complexity of aroma.  A specified minimum numbe r of years of maturation in oak 
casks is a legal requirement for grape brandies, da rk rums and whiskies.  During that 
time a complex sequence of reactions removes undesi rable flavours and creates 
desirable flavours in the mature spirit.  For Scotc h whisky, a minimum of 3 years’ 
maturation is a legal requirement, and Table 1 shows the typical effect of that maturation 
on the main flavour congeners, using a malt whisky spirit as an example, although in 
practice most Scotch malt whiskies would be matured for longer. 
 
Table 2.7.1: Maturation changes in a Scotch malt whisky spirit 
 
                Congener concentration (mg/litre) 
           New spirit                    3 years ol d  
Total higher alcohols  2500    2500 
Total esters      650      700 
Total sugars        0    1500 
Total acids      100      200 
Total aldehydes      80        50 
Tannins        0      500   
Also,   Ethanol            63 % abv           60 % abv  
 
Only the volatile components of the fermented wash can be present in the new spirit, so 
the entire amount of non-volatile congeners such as  sugars and tannins must develop 
during maturation.  However, the higher alcohols of  the spirit remain unchanged by 
maturation.  Changes in acids, aldehydes and esters  are greater than the table would 
suggest, since some compounds originally present ar e lost or reduced in amount, and 
partially replaced by different acids, aldehydes an d esters.  Only partially, since some of 
these classes of congener derived from raw material s or fermentation persist through 
maturation to contribute to the characteristic aroma of the product. 
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
About 2% of the volume is lost annually by evaporat ion from the cask, but the reduction 
of alcoholic strength during maturation is typical of Scottish conditions.  In theory, the 
smaller molecules of water vapour should evaporate faster than ethanol, and this 
actually happens in a dry climate, where the spirit  increases in alcoholic strength over 
maturation.  However, the damp Scottish atmosphere restricts evaporation of water so a 
slight dilution occurs. As a result, the changes in  flavour congeners are different in 
Scotland.  Hence the clause in the definition of Sc otch Whisky: it must be matured in an 
Excise warehouse in Scotland, thereby specifying th e environmental conditions of 
maturation.  The definition also specifies oak cask s, of maximum capacity 700 litres 
(since surface/volume ratio is important) and a min imum maturation period of 3 years.  
The significance of these factors is discussed below. 
 
Maturation is an expensive process.  The principal costs are: 
(a) Loss of capital: the value of the spirit itself, which can not be sold until the end of  the 
maturation period, and in Scotland, the bond lodged  with Revenue and Customs.  
Presumably other countries require a similar financial guarantee. 
(b) Outlay on casks and warehouse buildings; also their maintenance costs. 
(c) Costs of security against leakage, fire and theft. 
(d) The value of the proportion of the product which is unavoidably lost by evaporation   
(e)  Costs of general organisation, in particular r egular quality checks and record-
keeping, but  
even the initial checks for matching of the spirit to the available stock of casks 
represents a significant expense.    
 
So it is possible that 5 years of maturation could cost as much as the raw materials and  
labour and energy costs for initial production of t hat volume of spirit.  Therefore the 
duration of maturation has to be carefully consider ed, e.g. on that 5-year estimate, 
production of 15-year old whisky would be double th e cost of the same volume of 5-year 
old.  Do the contents of a cask have the potential to reach the quality to sell at the 
inevitably higher price? Another aspect of the cost  of maturation is the organisation of 
stocks for blending.  Since the age of a blended Scotch whisky is the age of its youngest 
component, not  the average, it makes commercial sense to blend wh iskies of the same 
age.  Unless there is some essential sensory contri bution from older whisky, the 
expense of the additional maturation of 10-year old is wasted on a 5-year old blend. 
 
 
Properties of cooperage oak wood 
Strong, durable, non-porous oak has been the prefer red wood for storage of preserved 
food and drink for hundreds of years.  Now, with th e availability of other methods of 
packaging and storage, maturation of alcoholic beverages is a rare surviving commercial 
use of oak casks, for which several types of oak (g enus Quercus ) are in common use.  
White oak, Q. alba , is available in greatest amount, largely because of its forest habitat.  
Competition for sunlight with other trees encourage s tall straight unbranched  trunks, 
yielding the greatest amount of useable wood per tr ee (Figure 2.7.1).  The principal 
source is U.S.A., hence its common name American oa k.  Several types of oak grow in 
Europe, particularly the species Q. robur, Q. pdunculata  and Q. petraea .  However,  
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
nomenclature of the genus Quercus  is still uncertain and these may not all be valid 
specific names, e.g. the shape and small size of Q petraea  may be due to its stony 
hillside habitat in the Limousin region of France.  In practice cooperage oak is known 
simply as either American, Spanish, Limousin, or another French type Tronçais, which is 
mainly used for wine.  Northern European types, particularly English and Memel, are not 
normally used for maturation of spirits, but have b een used in the past in casks for other 
purposes.  Not only the shapes of the trees differ;  there are significant differences in 
wood chemical structure which affect maturation of spirits, and which will be mentioned 
in the context of the specific congeners. 
 
Oak is a strong hardwood, and its structure prevent s leakage of liquids.  In a growing 
tree only an outer ring of wood just below the bark  carries sap to the higher levels of the 
tree.  In the inner zone, the heart wood, tyloses d evelop in, and block, the sap vessels 
and the grain of the wood.  Therefore well construc ted oak casks are impervious to 
liquids, but can not completely prevent slow loss o f water and alcohol vapour,  or inward 
diffusion of atmospheric oxygen, both of which fort uitously enhance the progress of 
maturation.   
Figure 2.7.1 shows the sequence of sawing an oak tr ee for cask staves.  The useable 
length of trunk of an American oak will be many tim es the length of a single cask stave, 
but with the shorter and more branched European oak s, only 1 - 2 stave lengths are 
likely.  Obviously this affects availability and cost of wood of cooperage quality.   
 
.  
  
Figure 2.7.1.  Preparation of oak for cooperage. 
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Precise sawing is essential to prevent leakage.  Th e staves are cut from a “bolt” of 
triangular cross-section so that the medullary rays  which run radially in the trunk are in 
the same plane as the cut.  If a ray runs across th e stave, that creates a leak.Oak must 
be seasoned before use in cooperage.  For tradition al outdoor seasoning, planks are 
laid in rows with each level of the stack at right angles to the next, to allow air to 
circulate.  Traditional seasoning continues for 1 –  2 years so it was inevitable that rapid 
oven treatments were introduced.  However, slow dec omposition changes in the wood 
over long slow open-air seasoning, too slight to af fect structural strength, release 
tannins which contribute to the matur-ation process .  The heating required to bend the 
cask staves (the curvature of traditional casks is essential for manual rolling and 
steering when filled).also causes some chemical deg radation of structural components, 
again providing possible congeners of maturation.  
 
Figure 2.7.2 illustrates the process of cask constr uction.  Glue or metal nails can not be 
used, so the planks of the cask ends are secured by  wooden pegs.  However, external 
steel bands can be used to hold the curved staves s ince liquid spirit can not come in 
contact with the metal round the outside of the cas k.  An important stage of manufacture 
of new casks, but not shown in Figure 2.7.2, is the  charring of the internal surface of the 
body of the cask, or at least a milder "toasting" w hich does not actually char the wood.  
Heating generates compounds which contribute to mat uration, as explained in the 
section on wood chemistry.  
 
Figure 2.7.2.  Construction of casks. 
 
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Commonest sizes of cask for whisky maturation are t he Standard American Barrel  (190 
litres) and the Hogshead (250 litres) but the tradi tional Butt and Puncheon (both 500 
littes but of different shape) are also still in us e.  For economy of transport, used 
American barrels are dismantled for export to Scotl and, and the staves are normally re-
assembled as 250 litre casks. The finished cask can  be tested by adding a few litres of 
water, pressurising with air and rolling the cask a round to check for leaks.  Another 
important activity of the cooperage is the "rejuven ation" of the inner surface of used 
casks by scraping off the previous char layer and r e-charring.  This can be repeated 
several times over the “life” of the cask since only about 2 mm has to be removed. 
 
Chemistry of oak wood and its heat-degradation products 
The structural strength of oak wood is conferred by  cellulose and lignin which constitute 
approximately 50% and 25% respectively of the wood.   The other 25% is accounted for 
by a variety of materials, the most important of wh ich are listed in Table 2.7.2.  Although 
the amount of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin is approximately constant, the amounts 
of some minor components vary between types of oak,  e.g.  Spanish oak has a higher 
content of extractable tannins than American.  
 
Many of the compounds contributing to maturation ar e generated, or at least their 
production is initiated, by toasting or charring of  the wood.  Because of the physical 
structure of oak wood, spirit can penetrate only ab out 4 mm.  Since the thermal gradient 
associated with charring the internal surface affec ts only the first 2 mm of wood, in the 4 
mm layer in contact with liquid spirit there is a r ange from unheated to intensely charred 
wood, providing a range of heat-degradation product s from different temperatures. 
Charring has the physical effect of increasing the surface area, and the capacity for 
absorption of sulphur compounds on the activated ca rbon.  Charring also forms caramel 
and other strongly coloured products which are extr acted into the spirit.  The less 
intense heating immediately beneath the charred lay er produces.degradation products 
of cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin and tannins whi ch are essential for maturation.   But 
even in the unheated layer the ethanol-lignin compl ex which is formed by contact with 
spirit releases the maturation congeners derived from lignin. 
 
Table 2.7.2.  Typical analysis of oak wood 
 
Polymer      %      Function   Contribution to matu ration   
Cellulose     50    Structural   Sweetness (glucose , cellobiose) 
 
Lignin      25    Structural              Ethanol-l ignin, lignin degradation products 
 
Hemicellulose     10    Cell gum   Sweetness (gluco se, arabinose, etc)    
                                                                        Various heterocyclics by thermal  
     degradation of pentoses 
 
Tannins              10     Antimicrobial               Ellagic, gallic acids, flavonoids, also  
     defence?       glucose 
       
Miscellaneous     5   Various   Lactones, sterols, terpenes, aliphatic  
   compounds                                                  acids and methyl esters, hydrocarbons, etc    
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
 
Heat-degradation of cellulose and hemicellulose pro duces a range of simple sugars.  
Cellulose is a linear polymer of β1-4 linked glucose units, hemicellulose (cell gum) is 
more complex (Figure 2.7.3).   
 
Glucose and cellobiose from cellulose, and the comb ination of glucose and the range of 
pentoses derived from hemicellulose,  contribute sw eetness and caramel colour to the 
maturing spirit.  Various heterocyclics, e.g. furan s, are also formed by pyrolysis of 
glucose and pentoses and extracted into the spirit,  but subsequently degraded to less 
objectionable congeners. 
 
 
 
 
 
.   
  
 
 
Figure 2.7.3.  Typical repeating unit of hemicellulose. 
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
 
 
Figure  2.7.4.  Structure of lignin and its guaiacyl and syringyl sub-units.    
The figure shows a softwood lignin, since it contains only guaiacyl units..    
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Table 2.7.3.  Formation of aromatic aldehydes during maturation in oak 
             
1 Lignin + ethanol     > Coniferyl alcohol, sinapic  alcohol 
 
2 Coniferyl alohol + O 2 > Coniferaldehyde        
 Sinapic alcohol + O 2 >  Sinapaldehyde 
 
3 Coniferaldehyde + O 2 > Vanillin 
 Sinapaldehyde + O 2     > Syringaldehyde     
 
 
Table 2.7.4.  Aromatic aldehydes (mg/litre) produce d by toasting or charring oak 
chips.  Treated chips, added at 2%, were extracted by 60% ethanol. 
 
Product             Toasted temperature oC         Charred  
   100  150  200    
Guaiacyl congeners : 
Coniferaldehyde trace  4.3  24.0  4.8 
Vanillin  1.1  3.8  13.5  2.8 
Vanillic acid    -  1.8    6.1  1.1 
 
Syringyl congeners : 
Sinapaldehyde trace  6.5  60.0  9.0 
Syringaldehyde 0.1  3.8  32.0  9.2  
 
However, the contribution of lignin degradation pro ducts is much more significant.  
Lignin is a complex phenolic polymer; hardwood lign ins such as oak contain both 
guaiacyl (mono-methoxy) and syringyl (di-methoxy) u nits, in approximately 1 :2 ratio, 
providing a complex range of congeners.  Unit A (to p right) separated from the complete 
structure by the successive effects of heat treatme nt (pyrolysis) and extraction by 
ethanol of the spirit (ethanolysis) would form 
coniferaldehyde.  The equivalent syringyl structure  with two methoxy groups is 
sinapaldehyde.  Table 2.7.3 is a summary of these r eactions, and subsequent oxidation 
reactions.  More detail, with chemical formulae, is provided in the Progress of Maturation 
section of this chapter.  Typical yields of these a nd related compounds from different 
intensities of experimental heat treatment and subs equent ethanolysis are shown in 
Table 2.7.4. 
 
The reduction in these compounds by the unspecified  high temperature of charring is 
not as important as may appear at first glance.  In  charring a cask, all temperatures in 
Table 2.7.4 would be reached at some point in the 2 -mm thermal gradient referred to 
above. However, although toasting at 200 oC gives a good yield of flavour compounds, 
only charring provides the surface layer of activat ed carbon that absorbs unwanted 
congeners.  Note that heating only to 100 oC yields little flavour, and all cask wood must 
be heated to about 100 oC to bend the staves to the correct shape.  More in tense 
heating, “toasting” at least, is generally regarded as necessary for spirit maturation for  
9 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
degradation.of wood polymers and destruction of unp leasant wood aromas.  Actual 
charring is often preferred, and is a legal requirement for Kentucky Bourbon whiskey..   
 
Heat degradation of tannins also produces a wide ra nge of non-volatile astringent and 
flavoured compounds.  Oak tannins are phenolic glyc oside polymers of which the 
principal degradation products are ellagic and gall ic acids, flavonoids, and glucose.  
Figure 2.7.5 illustrates these three important tann ins, but there are others which also 
contribute to mature flavour.  Tannins of the diffe rent types of cooperage oak differ in 
several respects, e.g. of the total tannin in Spani sh oak, 10% can be extracted into the 
65% alcohol typical of spirit maturation, but only 3% from American. Also the 
gallotannin/ellagitannin ratio varies between American and Spanish oaks. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.7.5.  Principal tannins of oak wood. 
 
Progress of maturation 
Before filling into casks, spirit from continuous d istillation must be diluted to about 65% 
abv.  Spirit from pot stills is normally of the cor rect strength for maturation, although the 
stronger product of triple distillation requires re duction.  For Kentucky Bourbon whiskey, 
there is a legal requirement for precisely 62.5% ab v (125 US proof) at filling.  Otherwise, 
if there is a standard filling strength, that is th e distillery’s choice. The range of 
congeners extracted from the wood varies with alcoh ol concentration, e.g. more of the 
water-soluble congeners such as glycerol and sugars  at lower concentration, and more 
of the ethanol-soluble (e.g. lactones, etc) at high er.  With filling strengths above about 
75% abv, wood lipids and unpleasant harsh flavours are increasingly extracted into the 
spirit, so the usual filling strength is 63 – 70%. 
 
The introduction and removal of congeners over the course of maturation are termed 
additive and subtractive reactions respectively, bu t it can be useful to subdivide these 
terms, e.g. to distinguish between additive and productive reactions.  Additive  refers to  
10 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
the extraction into the spirit of compounds which w ere already present  in the wood of 
the cask at the time of filling; productive  is the development of new  compounds over 
the course of maturation by reactions within the bu lk of the spirit, or between the spirit 
and the cask surface and/or oxygen.  Oxygen is init ially dissolved in the spirit by the 
turbulence of filling, and subsequently there is a slow diffusion of air through the wood of 
the cask.  Probably the most important example of p roductive maturation is the 
sequence of oxidation and esterification reactions of lignin degradation products (Figure 
2.7.6).   
 
 
Figure 2.7.6.  “Productive” oxidation and esterific ation reactions of lignin 
degradation products.  
 
 
Similarly, reductive and subtractive reactions can be distinguished.  Subtractive  implies 
physical removal , either by absorption to the activated carbon of t he char layer, or by 
evaporation through the wood of the cask, e.g. acet aldehyde and dimethyl sulphide.  
However, some of the acetaldehyde could be oxidised  to acetic acid, an example of a 
reductive  effect: where a congener is removed from the spirit, or at least reduced in  
11 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
amount, by chemical removal : conversion to a less pungent or more pleasantly 
flavoured compound.  Important examples of each are listed in Table 2.7.5.   
 
Table 2.7.5.  Examples of flavour changes during maturation in oak wood 
              
Type          Activity            Chemical compound s    
Additive Extraction of flavour      Sugars, aromati c aldehydes, lactones,  
  Congeners from wood     polyphenols, etc 
 
Productive Creation of new congeners           Acet als (by oxidation reactions) 
  by reactions in the spirit or      Esters (of eth anol + various acids) 
at surface of cask      Quinones (hydrolysis of tan nins) 
 
Subtractive Evaporation and      Acetaldehyde, dime thyl sulphide,  
  absorption to char layer     polysulphides (but s ee Fig. 8) 
             (Malt whisky: various N and S heterocy clics 
    from malt) 
          
Reductive Conversion of undesirable     Acrolein (v ery pungent)  to acrylic acid 
  congener to less strongly    
  flavoured          
 
 
Note that the progress of maturation is not linear:  changes occur rapidly at first and slow 
down over subsequent years (Figure 2.7.7).  It is f ortunate that in general it is the 
undesirable congeners which are removed by maturati on, but some desirable 
compounds may also be reduced in amount and regular sensory analysis is required.    
 
Figure 2.7.7.  Increase in colour and congeners during maturation.  
12 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
However, complete removal of some of the undesirabl e compounds may only be 
achieved by unacceptably long maturation.  An impor tant example of this problem is the 
slow removal of dimethyl polysulphides.  Dimethyl s ulphide is lost rapidly, mainly by 
evaporation, but absorption to char also occurs.  Unfortunately the more pungent di- and 
tri-sulphides decline slowly: Figure 2.7.8 shows ex cessive DMTS even after 12 years.  
So DMTS is an example of an unacceptable congener w hich may be impossible to 
control by maturation alone.  If “high” DMTS (i.e. high in the parts per billion range which 
gives off-flavour) is detected in a batch of new sp irit, re-distillation will give the copper of 
the still a second chance to remove the offending c ongener.  Once aware of the 
problem, increased removal of foreshots/heads durin g spirit distillation, bringing the 
initial DMTS content down to a more manageable leve l, is a more efficient solution for 
subsequent distillations.   
 
 
Figure 2.7.8.  Loss of sulphur compounds during maturation. 
DMS = Dimethyl sulphide; DMDS = Dimethyl disulphide, DMTS = Dimethyl trisulphide 
 
 
The history of the cask is also relevant in this co ntext.  A charred new cask, rich in all of 
the congeners associated with maturation and with a  powerful char layer of activated 
carbon, will carry out the required changes more ra pidly and effectively than a cask on 
its second fill, which is about 50% less efficient.   A further 25% (approximately) of “cask 
virtue” is lost on a third fill, after which the ch oice must be rejuvenation or disposal.  So, 
matching the spirit to the cask is important.  Sens ory assessment will determine how 
much maturation is required (i.e. sensory changes, rather than time) and new, refill or 
rejuvenated casks are chosen accordingly.  Re-use o f casks from other alcoholic 
beverages (e.g. sherry, port and Madeira wines) is also a possibility for whisky 
maturation.  However, whether to use such casks, an d if so for what proportion of the 
total maturation time, is so dependent on the prefe rences of individual blenders as to be 
beyond the scope of this chapter. 
 
Compared with brandy and rum maturation, where only  strongly-flavoured pot-distilled 
spirits would normally receive any significant maturation, the choice of cask is especially  
13 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
important in whisky maturation.  All whisky spirit,  ranging from lightly-flavoured grain to 
malt spirit with the phenolic aroma of peat smoke, requires at least 3 years of 
maturation, requiring a range of casks of different  potential for maturation changes..  
With a newly charred cask, the increase in additive  and productive congeners may 
overwhelm the lightly-flavoured spirit.  Figure 2.7 .9 is a simple sketch of the problem.  
The horizontal lines represent the congeners confer ring the basic character of two 
whiskies and the rising lines the development of ma turation flavour.   So, a new cask is 
acceptable for malt whisky of strong flavour character, whereas a “lighter” spirit would be 
overwhelmed by the maturation flavours developing e ven over only 3 years in that cask.  
A refill cask would be sufficient.  Although not included in Figure 2.7.9, the converse also 
applies: with their higher level of undesirable con geners at time 0, some malt whiskies 
could not be satisfactorily matured in the weaker refill cask.   
 
 
Figure 2.7.9.  Comparison of congener development i n newly charred and second 
refill casks. 
 
To complete this section, Figure 2.7.10 summarises the principal reactions associated 
with maturation of spirits.  Note that the char its elf (insoluble carbon) does not provide 
colour, which comes mainly from heated hemicellulose and lignin. 
 
Figure 2.7.10.  Relationship between wood constitue nts and flavour changes 
during maturation. 
14 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Other congeners 
The maturation congeners discussed above are formed  by degradation of polymers.  
Table 2.7.2 also mentioned aliphatic acids and thei r methyl esters, lactones, sterols, 
terpenes and hydro-carbons as components of the fin al 5% of the dry weight of oak 
wood.  These were named because of their contributi on to additive maturation by direct 
extraction from the wood, i.e. without preliminary heat degradation, but there are other 
compounds present as well.  Hydro-carbons, sterols and terpenes have little or no effect 
on aroma or flavour but, like tannins, could cause haze problems after bottling because 
of their poorer solubility in 40% ethanol than in the higher strength in the cask.   
 
Two important volatile congeners are “oak lactone” (coconut aroma) and eugenol (clove 
aroma).  Of the isomers of “oak lactone” 3-methyl-4 -octalactone (Figure 2.7.11), the 
trans  form has a slightly lower aroma threshold, about 0 .5 mg/litre, as an oak-wood 
aroma.  Its coconut effect is detectable above 1 mg /litre. However, both forms occur 
together and, extracted into maturing spirit, contr ibute to the coconut aroma. Oak 
lactone is another important example of a differenc e between the main oak types, in this 
case, American high yield, Spanish low.   
 
 
 
Figure 2.7.11.  “Oak lactone” and eugenol. 
 
 
Although similar in structure to vanillin (Figure 2 .7.6), eugenol is not part of the guaiacyl 
group of lignin degradation products formed by pyro lysis and ethanolysis.  It is already 
present in unheated oak and is extracted directly from the wood.. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Further reading 
The following three articles are recommended: 
J. Conner, K. Reid & F. Jack (2003).  Maturation and Blending.  Chapter 7 in Whisky:    
     Technology, Production and Marketing,  edited by. I. Russell.  Academic Press. 
K. Nishimura & R. Matsuyama (1989).  .Maturation and maturation chemistry.  Chapter  
     8 in The Science and Technology of Whiskies, edited by J. R. Piggott et al.,  
     Longman. 
J. M. Philp (1989). Cask quality and warehouse conditions.  Chapter 9 in The Science  
     and Technology of Whiskies , edited by. J. R. Piggott et a l.,  Longman. 
 
The contributions on maturation and wood chemistry in: 
J. R. Piggott (editor) (1983).  Flavour of Distilled Beverages .  Ellis Horwood,   
J. R. Piggott & A. Paterson (editors) (1989). Distilled Beverage Flavour .  Ellis Horwood,   
and in the Proceedings of the Institute of Brewing Aviemore Conferences 1982 – 1998, 
also of  the Institute of Brewing & Distilling Dist illed Spirits Conferences from 2001, may 
not now be easily available, but are useful reading if they can be obtained.. 
 
 
 
 
     Gin and Vodka Production 
 
Neutral spirit feedstock 
Gin, vodka and many liqueurs are prepared from neut ral spirit obtained by continuous 
distillation.  The usual raw materials for fermenta tion are grapes, molasses, potatoes or 
unmalted cereals.  The common factor is distillatio n to a minimum alcoholic strength of 
96.0% abv in the European Union (or perhaps slightl y different elsewhere) to remove 
most of the congeners which would impart a distinctive but unwelcome aroma or taste.   
 
The EU specification for neutral spirit for gin and  vodka production is shown below.  
Although  an upper limit is not officially specifie d, diacetyl is also an unacceptable 
congener.  However, the limit for all of these cong eners other than methanol is so low 
that nosing is a more practicable assessment of quality than chemical analysis.   
 
Table 2.7.6.  E.U. specification of neutral spirit:  maxima expressed as g/100 ml of 
pure ethanol. 
            
Total acidity (expressed as acetic acid)    1.5 g 
Esters (expressed as ethyl acetate)    1.3 g 
Aldehydes (expressed as acetaldehyde)    0.5 g 
Higher alcohols (expressed as iso -butanol)   0.5 g 
Methanol                 50 g 
Dry extract        1.5 g  
Volatile bases containing nitrogen (expressed as N)  0.5 g 
Furfural              not detectable    
 
16 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
These figures are too high for vodka, and also for certain types of gin, hence the 
requirement for further purification of the spirit by additional column stills and hydro-
selective distillation.  Although really Module 3 m aterial, a brief outline of the process is 
relevant here.   
 
Hydro-selective distillation 
The principle is explained in Figure 2.6.6 of the C ontinuous Distillation unit : at low 
alcohol concentration, iso-amyl alcohol is more volatile than ethanol, and at high ethanol 
concentration it is less volatile.  Therefore spiri t from a 2-column continuous distillation 
(identified as columns A and B) is diluted to 20% a bv with hot water as feed to a third 
column C, where amyl alcohols and other congeners o f similar behaviour (i.e. other 
higher alcohols) migrate to the upper  part of the column to be concentrated and drawn 
off for separation of fusel oil and ethanol.  Perma nently high-volatile congeners are 
vented off as heads.  Any rising ethanol vapour is refluxed in the downward flow of 
water, providing a stream of purified 20% alcohol a t the base of the column.  This is 
concentrated back to 96% abv in column D, which is similar in most respects to the 
original rectifier column B.  Also, the re-rectifie r column D is yet another opportunity to 
remove any traces of congeners remaining from colum n C, providing neutral spirit of a 
high degree of purity. The system is more energy-ef ficient than this description may 
suggest, since water continuously circulates at hig h temperature between columns C 
and D.  To reduce the number of separate stills req uired, the fusel oil fraction from 
columns C and D can go to fusel oil still of column  B for re-distillation, but not if rectifier 
column B also produces Scotch whisky spirit, since column D operates above the 94.8% 
limit. 
 
Vodka 
Even so, to meet the standards for high quality vod ka, the re-distilled spirit treated with 
activated charcoal.  Some vodka brands first requir e yet another re-distillation.  Usually 
spirit is diluted for charcoal treatment, perhaps o nly to 80% abv, but carbon-filtration 
may take place even at bottling strength.  The carb on treatment is one of the following:  
(a)  filtration through carbon-impregnated filter s heets, as many times as necessary for 
the desired quality, (b) mixing with powdered charc oal, which is then removed by 
filtration (a messy process, therefore not often us ed), or (c) passage through a series of 
columns of granular charcoal.  Good quality charcoa l is required, and (b) and (c) must 
be replaced at regular intervals or reactivated by steam treatment ( N.B. danger of 
spontaneous ignition of charcoal at 100 oC exposed to air),  
 
“Mouthfeel” is an important characteristic of many drinks, and particularly so with the 
essentially flavourless vodka.  To provide that sen sation, trace amounts of mineral salts 
(e.g. Ca and Na), sugars or sugar alcohols may be a dded below their flavour threshold.  
However, natural congeners from fermentation are al so present in small quantities that 
are impossible to remove completely, e.g. acetaldeh yde, diacetyl and methanol.  Their 
presence can prove, e.g. in a case of disputed auth enticity, that the vodka is not a 
synthetic mixture of ethanol and water but is of na tural origin.  Also, various flavoured 
vodkas exist, prepared by infusion with plant mater ial, not distillation as for gin or many 
liqueurs.  
17 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Gin 
The English word gin comes from Dutch genever  (juniper), the obligatory flavouring of 
both the Dutch and English (London and Plymouth) ve rsions.  An important distinction is 
that Dutch gin uses EU standard grain neutral spiri t, to preserve some grain flavour, but 
the London style of “dry gin” (which can be distill ed anywhere, provided the flavour is 
typical) requires a feedstock of re-distilled neutr al spirit from hydro-selective distillation.  
Since London gin is the type produced in greatest q uantity world-wide, these notes deal 
specifically with its production, but other gins differ only in minor details. 
 
The various plant materials for flavouring are coll ectively known as botanicals.  The 
flavour of juniper must predominate, but that does not prohibit a less strongly flavoured 
component being added in greater amount.  The ingre dients vary between brands, but 
the most commonly used, in addition to juniper berr ies, are believed to be coriander 
seeds, citrus peel (lemon, sweet orange or bitter o range), angelica root and cinnamon 
bark. All contain aromatic essential oils which are  extracted by the distillation process, 
according to the relative amounts of the botanicals , the alcohol charge of the still (% abv 
and(volume), geometry of the still (affecting reflu x) and the cut points.  Juniper berries 
are dried for storage after harvest, so quality ass essment is based on (a) aroma of 
essential oil, (b) the extractable yield of essenti al oil, (c) appearance and size and (d) 
moisture content.  Similar criteria apply to the other botanicals. 
 
A gin still usually has a taller neck to increase r eflux but is operated in the same way as 
the spirit still of rum or whisky distillation, exc ept for the higher starting % abv (usually in 
the 50 – 60% range) and the addition of botanicals.   For the latter, there are various 
possibilities: (a) botanicals added loose to the sp irit in the still, (b) added in a fabric or 
metal mesh bag for easier removal (giving a slightl y decreased yield) or (c) on a 
perforated tray above the charge of spirit in the s till, so that extraction is by alcohol 
vapour alone.  Adding botanicals for (a) or (b) to the spirit in the still 12 – 24 h for 
extraction before the start of distillation increas es the total yield of essential oils.  The 
only certainly about (c) is a different aroma profi le from (a) and (b); but the total yield of 
volatile oils is usually lower. 
 
As in rum and whisky distillations, the first disti llate (heads) is collected for recycling, 
then the gin fraction is collected down to the pred etermined % abv of the cut point, often 
40%.  The remaining alcohol is collected in the tai ls fraction.  However, recycling of 
heads and tails is not  done in the next run of the gin still, since repea ted distillation of 
botanical essential oils would create unacceptable flavours and aromas.  Instead, the 
gin feints are returned to the continuous distillat ion system that produced the pure spirit 
feedstock, for removal of the remaining flavour, an d concentration back to 96% spirit.  
Smaller distilleries have the choice of re-distilli ng their own feints in a single-column still 
similar that for Armagnac brandy (Figure 2.5.6, of unit 2.5), or selling back to the original 
supplier for purification. 
 
 
 
 
18 
Dipl. Distil. Module 2: Ferm’n, Distill’n & Mat’n: Unit 2.7. Post-distillation modification of Flavour 
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 2 Revision Notes Version 2, September 2010)  
Other production methods for gin. 
Not all gin is produced as above.  A product of sim ilar aroma can be produced by 
blending pure neutral spirit with gin concentrate, e.g. a concentrated gin from a 3-fold 
greater charge of botanicals.  Despite loss of the desirable title "distilled gin", the 
advantage is that a standard flavour concentrate is  provided for different bottling plants.  
However it is probably impossible to produce exactl y the same aroma by the two 
methods.  Although the two should be of the similar  quality, triple strength gin diluted in 
neutral spirit is unlikely to be identical with the product from standard distillation. 
 
Gin flavourings (gin essences) are highly concentrated products from specialised flavour 
companies. Some are specific essential oils produce d by distillation of plant material 
with ethyl alcohol, but solvent extraction in liqui d ethyl alcohol, liquid CO 2 or other 
solvent is also used for production of essences for  “compounded gin”. Again, there are 
advantages for producing a standard product world-w ide, but with the loss of the title 
“distilled gin”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 