1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 1A: Raw Materials & Preparation 
of Cereal Wort 
 
Unit 1A.5 – Mashing in Malt Whisky Distilleries 
 
1A .5.1 Mashing Procedures 
 
This recipe is used around the world for making whi skies exclusively from an all malt 
mash. Malt whiskies have a distinct  flavour that i s due in part to the type of malt 
mashed . 
 
The conversion of starch to sugars has already star ted during the malting process, 
following the breakdown of the cell walls and protein matrix surrounding the granules. 
This conversion was stopped by drying the grains. I t is restarted by adding back the 
water but there is no point in doing this with whol e grains because the distiller must 
extract from the mash 
•  all of the partly solubilised starch, 
•  all of the sugars already formed and, 
•  all of the diastatic enzymes. 
 
This cannot be done efficiently unless the grain ha s been milled to make the starch, 
the sugars and the enzymes accessible by water. 
 
 
 M ILL ING  
The malt is 
crushed  
C rushed m alt 
is m ixed with 
water to  start  
th e co nversion  
con versionn  process  
The starch is 
converted into 
sugar by the 
m alt 
 
M ASHING  CO NVER - 
S IO N  
 
 
 
Mashing requires the following equipment: 
 
1. A grist hopper from which to feed the grist in a  controlled way to the mixer. 
2. A supply of water that can be fed to the mixer t hrough a heat exchanger to 
achieve a precise temperature 
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
3. A grist/water mixer, often a tube fitted with a screw, for instance a ‘Steels 
masher’, that delivers the mix over the side of and into the mashing vessel and 
4. A mashing vessel. 
 
Mashing vessels of different designs are used for m alt whisky production, but all of 
them have: 
•  a set of blades or a rake to stir the mash in a co ntrolled way and 
•  a slotted base that sits just above the outlet. 
When the outlet valve is opened, the mash settles g ently on the slotted base through 
which the liquid extract is withdrawn. The grain ex tract is the unfermented mash; an 
alternative and much shorter name used in Scotland is ‘wort’. It may be clear or 
slightly cloudy, depending on the type of mashing v essel in use and the manner in 
which it is operated. 
  
 
C le a r  W o r t 
S p e n t G r a in 
 
 
 
Mashing is carried out in the following way. The grist is mixed with water that is called 
the first water because more water will be used lat er in the process. This mixing of 
the first water and the grist is called ‘mashing-in ’. Mashing-in is a critical step 
because the water must be at a precisely controlled temperature.  
 
The temperature of the mash in the mashing vessel must be: 
•  warm enough to gelatinise the remaining malt starc h, 
•  cool enough to preserve the activity of the enzyme s and 
•  be near to the optimum temperature for the speed o f action of the malt 
amylases. 
The temperature that is the best compromise between  these three requirements is in 
the range 62 to 65 ºC. Many distilleries use 64.0 ºC. 
   
The mash is stirred occasionally and after a given time that could be between 20 to 
70 minutes after filling. During this time the malt  enzymes, alpha-amylase and beta-
amylase, are converting (saccharifying) the starch to maltose and maltotriose. After 
the allotted time has elapsed, the wort is withdrawn from the bottom of the vessel. 
This is called the strong wort because it contains a high percentage of sugar. It is 
pumped through a heat exchanger to cool it to the temperature that suits the yeast  
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
that is to be added. This is usually in the range o f 15 to 25 ºC. From the heat 
exchanger the wort is  
 
 
Hot wort in 
Cold wort out 
 
transferred directly to the fermentation vessel. As  soon as there is about 50cm of 
depth of wort at the correct temperature in the ves sel, the yeast is added because it 
is essential for fermentation to start very quickly . Unyeasted fresh wort becomes 
heavily infected with Lactobacilli  in a matter of an hour of so. 
 
Meanwhile, back in the mashing vessel the bed of gr ain still contains some materials 
that the distiller needs: a little more sugar and m ore starch that can be converted to 
sugar by the enzymes carried over into the fermenta tion vessel. So warmer second 
water is added (about 70 ºC), drained off, cooled and sent to the fermentatio n vessel. 
Then the hot third water (about 80 ºC) is used to wash any remaining sugar out of the 
grain. The third water is normally recycled to form  at least part of the first water for 
the next mash. 
 
This is the traditional method of “3-water” mashing  in which the mash is stirred by a 
set of rotating paddles after the addition of each water and  the wort  run off to wash 
back, or to a storage tank for recycling into the n ext mash in the case of third waters. 
This method has been replaced by sparging the water  onto the mash semi 
continuously ( as in brewing) and the wort run off continuously until the required 
volume and gravity is achieved in the wash back.  
 
At the end of the mashing process, the fermentation  vessel is full of wort that is 
already fermenting rapidly. The mashing vessel cont ains the grain debris (draff), 
mainly husk, material that contains very little sug ar or starch. This is used as feed for 
cattle or is disposed of in another environmentally friendly way. 
 
The specific gravity of the wort depends on the amo unt of water added per tonne of 
malt, usually about 10 tonnes. The specific gravity is usually within the range of 1.050 
and 1.070 and the pH value about 5.2. Maltose and m altotriose are the main sugars 
in the wort, together with smaller amounts of gluco se and maltotetraose. All of these 
sugars can be fermented by suitable yeast strains b ut at the end of mashing only 
about 72% of the extracted wort is fermentable. Abo ut 15% of the remaining starch 
fragments called dextrins are converted in the ferm enting wash. This is called the 
‘secondary conversion’ without which the alcohol yield would be reduced by about 60 
litres of alcohol per tonne. 
 
These processes are described in more detail in the following sections. 
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A .5.2. The Principles and Purpose of Mashing 
 
The major objective of mashing and wort preparation  is to extract all of the available 
carbohydrate from the raw materials and present it to the yeast in a fermentable 
form. A subsidiary but important objective is  to extract other materials: 
•  that provide the yeast with nutrients leading to a  successful fermentation 
and 
•  other materials such as lipids which will eventual ly contribute to the flavour 
of the new make spirit. 
 
As mentioned above the final portion of conversion that takes place in the early 
stages of fermentation is known as 'secondary conve rsion' The extent of secondary 
conversion is also dependent on mashing conditions and can determine the limit of 
alcohol yield.  
 
The conditions chosen by each distillery are therefore vital in obtaining: 
 
•  optimal extraction of potentially fermentable carb ohydrate, additional ,yeast 
nutrients and  the full compliment of diastatic enzymes from the malt, and  
•  optimal conversion of the carbohydrate to fermenta ble sugars. 
 
When present, protein-degrading enzymes (proteases)  can produce smaller 
molecules such as amino acids which are essential f or yeast growth early in 
fermentation. Malt does contain some protease and s ome additional amino acid is 
produced during mashing. However the bulk of the ne cessary amino acid is already 
in the malt and is produced during the malting proc ess when the protein matrix 
surrouding the starch is being broken down. 
 
‘Conversion’ or ‘saccharification’ are the terms us ed to describe the enzymic 
production of fermentable wort from starch. In the starch granule there are two 
different types of polymer both consisting of long polymers of glucose units alpha-1-4 
linked together. Each polymer is linked to one or m ore similar  chains by alpha 1-6 
linkages. About 20% or more of the starch consists of amylose which has very few 
inter chain alpha 1-6 linkages. Amylopectin, on the  other hand has a 1-6 linkage for 
every 25 glucose units arranged as shown below 
 
 
 
 
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Structure of amylopectin: The upper diagram shows chains of about 25  glucose  units 
arranged in an almost parallel  semi-crystalline fo rmation. It is thought that amylose infills 
between these amylopectin molecules so that the sta rch granule can assume an almost 
spherical shape. The lower diagram shows how the gl ucose units are chemically linked 
between carbons 1 and 4 in the linear parts of each  chain and between carbons 1 and 6 at 
the branch point. The stereochemical shape of each glucosidic bond is in the alpha position. 
 ( NB the polymer would be cellulose if the glucosi dic  bond was in the beta position i.e. with 
the interlinking oxygen atom  above the plane of the glucose ring)  
 
 
The additional diagrams below illustrate how malt e nzymes attack the long chains of 
glucose units that make up the starch molecule and convert them into fermentable 
sugars. For ease of demonstration they actually sho w the effect of malt enzymes on 
a small fragment (dextrin) of  amylopectin. In the intact molecule there is, on average, 
one “branch” chain to every “main” chain. Each  cha in is 25 glucose units in length 
and in the intact molecule the “free”  reducing end  demonstrated below is connected 
to another “main” chain resulting in a huge polymer  of branched chains. In the 
granule the chains of amylopectin lie almost parall el to one another in a semi-
crystalline fashion and since granules are almost s pherical  in appearance the 
amylose fills in what would inevitably be fissures on the surface. These parts of the 
granule are amorphous and do have gaps which allows  access to amylolytic 
enzymes during malting. In barley the starch granul e is enclosed in a membrane and 
is surrounded by a protein matrix both of which are  broken down during endosperm 
modification to allow enzymes to start hydrolysing the starch within these fissures 
giving the malt starch granules a pitted appearance . Furthermore during modification 
most of the small starch granules are preferentially hydrolysed. So apart from surface 
pitting the malt starch granules are almost intact and have the full complex of 
hydrolysing enzymes adsorbed so that they can resta rt starch degradation 
immediately in the mash tun. This is the major diff erence between an all malt mash 
and a grain distilling mash which requires the non- malted cereal starch to be 
gelatinised before hydrolysis. Malt starch on the o ther hand will dissolve and 
saccharify, albeit slowly, at much lower temperatures. 
 
 
 
 
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Model of outer part of an amylopectin molecule  
 
 
 
Legend:  The outermost chains are called A-chains and the in ner chains which are linked to 
more than one chain are called B-chains. The average length of all chains is 25 glucose units 
and there are equal numbers of A- and B-chains. The  open circles, with horizontal linkages, 
represent alpha 1-4 linked glucose units and the li nes connecting black circles represent 
alpha 1-6 inter chain linkages. The black circles r epresent potential limit dextrins. The whole 
molecule contains several million glucose units.   
 
 
α-Amylase is very active during mashing. It attacks randomly in the chains of both 
amylose and amylopectin  to produce a mixture of ma ltose (2 glucose units), 
maltotriose (3 glucose units) and a whole range of dextrins (from 4 to 20 units) like 
the one depicted above. 
β-amylase is also very active during mashing. It wor ks its way along chains from the 
branch ends (non-reducing) releasing maltose as it progresses.  
 
 
This small segment (dextrin) of the amylopectin mol ecule has been broken down to 
the following molecules: - 
•  two glucose (Maltase action), 
•  two maltose,  
•  one maltotriose, 
•  one 8-glucose unit branched chain limit dextrin 
 
α-amylase 
 
α-amylase 
β-amylase 
 
β-amylase  
 
Maltase 
Branch Linkage 
Glucose Unit 
Glucose 
Reducing 
End 
Enzyme 
Action 
Point 
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
[NB In the presence of the exogenous (i.e. external ly added) enzymes, 
amyloglucosidase and pullulanase, the attack on the  starch molecule is different, but 
this does not apply to malt whisky production. ] 
 
The amylases can only come within one or two units of the branch points so that the 
so called “limit dextrins”  surrounding each branch  point will contain between 4 and 8 
glucose units like the one depicted in the diagram . It is easy to calculate that if there 
are two branch points for every 50 glucose units th en approximately 12% of the 
original molecule would remain as a limit dextrin. However, malt contains small 
amounts of  two secondary enzymes, limit dextrinase  and alpha glucosidase 
(maltase) which have the effect of breaking down at  least half of the residual limit 
dextrins in the fermenting wort. . In the model sho wn above the limit dextrin 
containing the branch linkage would be broken at th e branch point by limit dextrinase 
to create two new linear dextrins, one with three u nits (maltotriose) and one with five. 
The 5-unit molecule could then be broken by further  action of the amylases to create 
one molecule of maltose and one of maltotriose. All  of the new fragments would then 
be fermentable. 
 
The maltase enzyme is shown breaking maltose into t wo units of glucose in the 
above diagram but it can also break down maltotrios e and to a lesser extent 
maltotetraose (4 glucose units).  
 
Both of these minor enzymes are heat sensitive so some of their activity is lost during 
mashing. Nevertheless, they do make an important  contributi on to the 
additional 15% of fermentability gained by secondar y conversion as 
demonstrated below .  
 
Knowing the action of the four different enzymes allows a simple mathematical model 
of fermentable extract (FE) and secondary conversion to be created. For this model it 
is assumed that for 100g of dry barley, with a prot ein content of 10%, there is a 10% 
malting loss yielding 90g of malt which, at 82% ext raction will deliver 74g soluble 
extract. The 74g of potential extract is derived fr om 59g of starch, 9g of pre- 
hydrolysed starch sugars, 4.5g of soluble protein ( assuming a 45% SNR) and 1.5g of 
other solutes such as glucan/pentosan residues, min erals, etc.(see composition 
tables above) If we assume that the 59g of starch c onsists of 20% amylose and that 
all of it will be hydrolysed to fermentable sugar, then this will contribute 11.8g to the 
FE.  
Referring to the diagram of amylopectin above and assuming that: 
 
•  there is no action from limit dextrinase and alpha  glucosidase (maltase) and 
•  the amylases cannot  come closer than two glucose units to an alpha 1-6 linkage 
(the black circles in the diagram) and 
•  there are four branch points for every hundred glu cose units (i.e. the ratio of A-
chains to B-chains is 1:1) 
 
then the amylopectin will be broken down to 28% dex trin (4x7 glucose units around 
each 1-6 linkage) and 72% fermentable sugars so yie lding 34g of fermentable sugar 
from the 47.2g of amylopectin. So the model of fermentable extract is; 
 
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Preformed sugars in the malt  9g 
FE from amylose hydrolysis  11.8g 
FE from dextrinised amylopectin  34g 
Assimable  amino nitrogen  
& other nutrients    0.2g 
 
Total FE     55g 
Total extract     74g 
Apparent Fermentability   74.3% 
  
This is the same  order of magnitude for the fermentability of a boiled wort derived 
from a cured lager malt,  with no secondary conversion post run-off. 
Using the same data we can now estimate what the FE would be if all the branch 
points in amylopectin were to be hydrolysed: 
 
Preformed sugars in the malt  9g 
FE from amylose hydrolysis  11.8g 
FE from amylopectin hydrolysis  47.2g 
Assimable  amino nitrogen  
& other nutrients    0.2g 
 
Total FE     68.2g 
Total extract     74g 
Apparent Fermentability   92.2% 
 
So the range of spirit yields expected from a malt with 82% dwb extract would be 369 
l.alc./t and 458 l.alc./t The latter figure equates to a yield of 435l.alc./t for a malt at 5% 
moisture mashed and fermented as “all-grains-in” *  at ambient temperature. The 
limits of fermentability derived from this model ar e therefore realistic. If we then take 
the range of fermentability as 18% then a malt with  a fermentability of say 87.5% 
indicates that about 73% of the available dextrin h as been hydrolysed. Since the 
dynamics of amylolysis are such that some dextrins are rendered undegradable by 
limit dextrinase and some branch points are so clos e together that the enzymes 
cannot access them, it would appear that a fermenta bility of about 88% is the 
maximum that can be achieved by conventional mashin g. Only when all four 
enzymes act in concert on an intact starch granule at ambient temperatures do we 
know that complete saccharification is achieved. Us ing the “all-grains-in” test, 
laboratory yields of 435l.alc./t are easily achieva ble indicating that an appropriate 
form of programmed mashing could substantially incr ease fermentability of distilling 
malts. The secondary enzymes limit dextrinase and m altase are therefore vital in 
achieving the maximum fermentability in distilling malt. Total saccharification is only 
achievable at low temperatures when the kinetics of  hydrolysis of  a hydrated starch 
granule are completely different from a gelatinized  granule in a 64 0C mash. The 
mashing temperature also partially inactivates limi t dextrinase and maltase but there 
is still sufficient activity to completely hydrolyse the starch at lower temperatures.  
 
(*this is a laboratory test in which finely ground malt is mashed at room temperature 
and to which distilling yeast is added. The spirit yield is determined in the normal way 
and represents the maximum which can be achieved from that malt. ) 
9 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
The range of sugars produced during conversion dete rmines the fermentability of the 
wort. If the enzyme attack is complete, the wort wi ll be highly fermentable as the 
above model demonstrates. If the enzyme attack is i ncomplete, the wort will be only 
partially fermentable. Enzymes are very sensitive t o the conditions that they work in. 
They are affected by how much water is present, tem perature and pH or mash 
acidity. They take time to work, so the length of t ime that is allowed for mash 
conversion will affect the degree of conversion. 
 
 
 
 
There are optimum conditions for mashing and these are summarised in the table 
below : 
 
Condition Low Optimum High 
Temperature.  Low temperatures do not 
affect the enzymes much, 
but the starch must be 
gelatinised first to achieve 
quick conversion. 
Gelatinisation temperature 
for malt starch is 60-65 °C. 
65 °C High temperatures 
inactivate enzymes, 
including α and ß 
amylases and limit 
dextrinase. 
The action of amylases 
is stopped at 
temperatures over 
70 °C. 
pH. Acidic conditions kill the 
enzymes. Enzyme action is 
stopped at pHs below 5.0 
5.4 High pHs slow enzyme 
action, but it does 
continue at pHs of 7 or 
above. 
Water. 
(Mash 
thickness) 
Enzymes are more sensitive 
to heat in a thin mash. 
There is a lower 
concentration of enzyme and 
starch in a thin mash.  
Between 2.5 
and 3.5 litres 
of water per 
kilogram of 
dry grist.  
Enzymes are less 
sensitive to heat in a 
thick mash. There is a 
higher concentration of 
enzyme and starch in a 
thick mash.  
Time. Enzymes take time to attack 
the starch. Conversion will 
be incomplete in less than 30 
minutes.  
30 minutes Conversion will be 
almost complete after 
30 minutes. A longer 
time will not increase 
the yield of sugar but 
may make it more 
fermentable, but not if 
the temperature is 
~65 O C. 
 
10 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A .5.3. Calculation of Mash Tun Extract in a Malt Distillery 
  
The ratio of water to malt grist (i.e. the concentr ation) used in a mash determines the  
volume and the subsequent  alcoholic strength of an  all-malt wash. Calculations are 
therefore required to ascertain how much of each co mponent is needed to end up 
with the desired volume and strength of wash.  
This equation involves using a Specific Gravity (SG ) figure The SG of a solution, 
such as wort, is defined as ‘the weight of a soluti on divided by the weight of an equal 
volume of distilled water at the same temperature ( both  weights in air)’ The 
temperature is usually 20 0C. An example is 1.055, where  1 ml. of water weigh s 1 
gram and 1ml of the solution weighs 1.055 grams. 
The SG as defined above is often expressed as a mul tiple of 1000 (i.e. on the basis 
that water’s SG=1.000, would now be 1000). When exp ressed in this manner it is 
often referred to as simply the ‘gravity’, e.g. 1055 (or ‘Ten fifty five’) 
The SG can also be written in the form (1000 x SG) – 1000 (in this case 55). The 
solution-in this case wort- is said to have 55 degr ees of excess gravity. In the 
equation that follows, the excess Original Gravity (OG) figure is 55. The OG is the 
SG at the beginning of fermentation, before any alc ohol is produced. If the volume 
(litres) of wort and the weight of malt mashed (Kg)  are known then the amount of 
extract (%)  in the wort can be calculated by measuring the OG: 
 
Soluble Extract (%)  = litres wort x excess Original Gravity  
     3,87 x kg malt mashed 
 
The example below now illustrates  the necessary calculation to estimate the quantity 
of malt required to achieve 50,000 litres of wash w ith an O.G. of 1060 in a malt 
distillery using a malt with an extract of 77.5% as is: 
 
Kg malt mashed =(50,000 x 60)/(77.5x 3.87) = 10,000 = 10tonnes 
 
 
 
1A .5.4. The Principles and Purpose of Wort Separat ion 
 
When conversion is complete, the mash will consist of a sugar solution called wort 
and the husks of the malted barley. The purpose of wort separation is to remove 
these husks and any other particles that are not wanted in the wort. 
The objectives of effective wort separation are the  removal of unwanted material 
while at the same time extracting all the available  wort. Wort is separated from the 
spent malt grains in every malt distillery since un wanted “grainy” flavours would be 
ectracted in the fermenting wash and the wash still. 
 
Effective wort separation means : 
•  Maximising extract recovery. 
•  Absence of particles in the wort. 
•  Absence of starch in the wort. 
 
 
11 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
To achieve these objectives, wort separation systems use some common principles : 
•  Filtration using the husk as a fine filter support ed by the slotted base in the 
case of a mash or lauter tun. 
•  Control of wort flow to ensure wort clarity and ma ximise filtration efficiency. 
•  Sparging with hot waters to extract the maximum am ount of soluble extract 
(wort). 
•  Spent grain (waste husk) removal and disposal on c ompletion of filtration. 
 
There are many systems in which wort can be separat ed from the mash, the most 
common in the Scotch Whisky industry being : 
•  The traditional mash tun. 
•  The lauter mash tun. 
•  the semi-lauter mash tun 
 
Unlike the brewing industry where mash filtration i s now quite a common practice, 
there is presently only one distillery in Scotland which operates a mash filter. The 
operation of different wort separation systems, inc luding a mash filter,is illustrated in 
the diagrams below :  
 
N.B. All types of mash tun act both as a conversion  vessel and  as a wort separation 
vessel.  
 
 (a) Mash Tun 
 
In a traditional mash tun, filtration through the d eep bed gives bright wort, but it is 
relatively slow. 
 
Wort flow is controlled by adjusting the taps on th e outlet main or by a manometric or 
(differential pressure controlling) device such as a balancing underback (see below). 
Strong wort (called the first water ) is run off slowly because its high concentration 
and the mash bed must not settle on to the plates t oo quickly. When the first water is 
fully drained, a second water at a higher temperatu re is added through the mashing 
machine at a temperature of 75 -77 0C and mixed into the drained mash. This second 
water is again allowed to drain off, before a final , third water is added at 77 – 87 0C 
and again mixed with the rotating paddles. This fin al water or “sparge” is not cooled 
and pumped to the wash-back but is retained as mashing water for the next mash. 
When all the wort has been run off, spent grain is removed through a port in the base 
either manually or by discharge gear rotating arms 
 
Such deep bed mash-tuns with traditional paddle mix ers are now very rare because 
the majority of Scotch whisky distilleries firstly converted their mash tuns to a “semi-
lautering” system by installing rotating sparge arms as shown below  
12 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Sparge water 
supply to rotating 
sprinkler. 
Wort flow control. 
Deep bed of mash 
which 'floats' above 
the plates. 
Spent 
grain 
out. 
Mash tun 
Slotted 
plates 
through 
which the 
wort is 
filtered. 
 
 
The traditional mash tun is a simple but effective system involving only one vessel for 
both the mash conversion and wort separation proces ses. It gives good quality wort 
but has a slow turn round time and is less efficien t for extracting and transferring the 
enzymes, which are required to continue their activities in the washback. 
 
The underback is a vessel through which the wort fl ows and it is used to control its 
run-off rate. It is important that the malt bed is not pulled down on to the mash tun 
plates, when it would impair drainage. Most malt di stilleries are equipped with a 
balanced underback, in which the wort level in the mash tun and underback are 
equalised, allowing close control of the run-off rate. 
 
 (b) Semi - Lauter and  Lauter Tun 
 
 
The first semi lauter mash tuns were run essentiall y in the same manner as the 
traditional mash tun, but instead of adding and mix ing separate waters and filtering to 
almost dryness, sparge (hot water) is sprayed gentl y over the grain, usually in two or 
three batches (waters) in much the same way as a true lauter.  
 
This system was an interim technology whereby a tra ditional mash tun was fitted with 
a rotating sparge arm or with sparge rings instead of adding separate waters through 
the Steeles masher and mixing with rotating paddles .  The first and second waters  
are then pumped to the fermentation vessel (washback) and any subsequent water is 
returned to the sparge tank for use in the next mash. 
 
A true lauter tun is depicted below with a much sha llower bed , proper lauter knives 
and rotating sparge arm or sparge rings. Because the mash is added  
directly to the lauter via the mashing machine and not to a separate mash conversion 
vessel these lauter tuns are sometimes also referred to as “semi-lauters” In a lauter 
13 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
tun, filtration gives bright wort through a shallow  bed; often the first runnings of 
cloudy wort are recirculated, a process known by th e German term vorlauf . In this 
system sparging is continuous while the shallow mas h-bed is raked by the slowly 
rotating lautering knives. The sparge temperatures are ramped up at suitable time 
intervals to mimic the old three water system. Howe ver the extraction is much more 
efficient and higher working gravities can be achieved. 
 
Wort flow is controlled by taps on the outlet main,  by a manometric (differential 
pressure controlling) device such as a balancing un derback or by automated flow 
control valves. Strong wort is run off just as desc ribed above for the mash tun. Rakes 
are used to reduce bed compaction in order to incre ase wort flow if it has slowed 
down. This affects filtration performance and can c ause the wort to go cloudy for a 
significant period but such cloudy wort is still transferred to the washback. 
 
Sparge is sprayed over the grain bed as shown above  and the last high temperature 
sparge is retained, as in the traditional method, for subsequent 
The shorter run-off times of lauter tuns are benefi cial to the enzymes, helping 
preserve their activity for use in the washback. 
 
Spent grain is removed through a port in the base b y discharge gear attached to the 
rakes.  
 
 
Sparge water 
supply to sprinkler. 
Wort flow control. 
Lauter tun 
Slotted 
plates 
through 
which the 
wort is 
filtered. 
Spent 
grain 
out. 
Shallow bed of 
mash. 
Rakes to hasten filtration 
Raking gear drive 
 
14 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
(c) Mash Filter.  
 
A Plate and Frame type of filter can be used to obt ain wort in distilleries. The mash 
filter’s numerous small bed depths rather than a si ngle deeper bed enables a very 
fast run-off of wort and effective sparging.  
The filter is constructed of alternate frames to ho ld the mash and plates to channel 
wort run-off and sparging, all separated by filter cloths which hang over the plates: - 
 
Plate Cloth Mash 
frame 
 
 
 
Classical mash filter 
The operating principles of the classical mash filter are explained below: 
 
1. The filter is first flushed with hot water before t he converted mash from the 
mashing vessel is transferred into the mash frames through the top central channel. 
This channel bypasses the plates. 
 
Mash filling 
 
 
 
2.  When the filter is full, wort drains from the mash into the plate on one side of 
the frame (the wort plate) and down into the wort channel. 
15 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Wort run-off 
 
 
Wort is run from the wort channel into a buffer tan k and from there into the boiling 
copper/kettle. 
 
3. Sparging, to wash out all the wort from the mash is  achieved by pumping water 
into the plate on the other side of the frame (the sparge plate), across the mash bed 
and then through wort channel. 
 
Sparging 
 
 
 
The spent grain is dropped from the filter at the e nd of the cycle when the filter is 
opened. 
 
Modern mash filter 
The modern thin-bed mash filter operates on the sam e principle but it has several 
important refinements as can be seen in the diagram  below: - 
 
16 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
Filter cloth 
Membrane 
Plate 
Frame  
 
•  The mash frames are fitted with an expandable memb rane, which is inflated in 
order to squeeze the mash beds gently and improve y ield (extract). This also gives 
a much drier spent grain cake with a lower effluent  loading. 
 
•  The filter is filled from the bottom channel, whic h reduces mash aeration and fills 
the chambers homogeneously. 
 
•  The filters have polypropylene plates as opposed t o the cast iron or stainless steel 
of the classical filter, making them lighter and ea sier to handle 
 
The operating principles of the modern mash filter  are explained below: 
 
1. The filter is filled from the underside: - 
 
Mash in 
Air out 
 
 
 
2. Wort is filtered through the grain bed supported by  the cloths: - 
 
Wort out 
Wort out 
 
17 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
       
3. The grain bed is compressed to extract the maximum amount of strong 
               wort (wort is still being filtered at this stage):  - 
 
Air pressure 
 
 
 
4. Sparge is run in through the mash infilling system (wort is still being filtered at 
this stage): - 
Sparge in 
Sparge in 
 
 
5.  The grain bed is compressed again to extract all th e weak wort.  
 
6. The spent grain is dropped from the filter at the e nd of the cycle when the filter 
is opened. 
 
 
The mash filter is being developed and improvements  are being made all the time. 
The latest plant gives good quality wort; excellent  extract recovery and a fast turn 
round time.  
18 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A .5.5. Spent Grain Discharge.  
 
The waste husk after the wort has been removed is a  valuable co-product because it 
can be utilised as cattle food. Often referred to a s draff, the  spent husks are 
discharged from the mash-tun or lauter by the paddl es or rakes sweeping the draff 
roud and dropping it down through a port in the fal se bottom. It is then conveyed 
mechanically or pneumatically to a draff hopper fro m whence it can be transported 
directly to local farms as a direct cattle feed or to a “dark grains “ plant where it is 
died and processed along with pot-ale from the dist illery. 
 
 
1A .5.6. Prevention of Microbial Contamination. 
 
Because wort contains a high percentage of sugar, i t is cooled and transferred 
rapidly to fermentation vessel in order to prevent any microbial contamination from 
adversely affecting fermentation before yeast can s tart to grow. 
It is pumped through a heat exchanger to cool it to  the temperature that suits the 
yeast that is to be added. This is usually in the r ange of 15 to 25 ºC.  
From the heat exchanger the wort is transferred dir ectly to the fermentation vessel. 
 
Hot wort in 
Cold wort out 
 
 
As soon as there is about 50cm of depth of wort at the correct temperature in the 
vessel, the yeast is added because it is essential for fermentation to start very 
quickly. Unyeasted fresh wort becomes heavily infec ted with Lactobacilli  in a matter 
of an hour of so. 
 
 
1A .5.7. Preservation of Enzyme Activity in Wort . 
 
A significant amount of starch remains to be conver ted to sugar in the early stages of 
fermentation. This is called the ‘secondary convers ion’ without which the alcohol yield 
would be about 15% lower. 
 
Unlike brewing, distillery wort is not boiled prior  to fermentation in order to preserve 
the enzyme activities to carry out this secondary c onversion.  
Keeping sparge temperatures lower is also important  here. 
The shorter run-off times of lauter tuns are benefi cial to the enzymes, helping 
preserve their activity for use in the washback. 
 
Similarly, the modern mash filters not only give go od quality wort, with excellent 
extract recovery, but the fast turn round time also  helps preserve enzyme activities. 
 
  
19 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A .5.8.  Wort Properties. 
 
The specific gravity of the wort depends on the amo unt of water added per tonne of 
malt, usually about 10 tonnes. The specific gravity  is usually within the range of 1.050 
and 1.070 and the pH value about 5.2.  
Maltose and maltotriose are the main sugars in the wort, together with smaller 
amounts of glucose and maltotetraose. All of these sugars can be fermented by 
suitable yeast strains. 
 
Nearly all of the sugars formed from the barley sta rch during mashing can be used by 
yeast.  
The wort also supplies the following nutritional re quirements for yeast: 
 
•  Nitrogenous compounds in the form of amino acids. These are created 
from the barley protein during malting and mashing.  
•  Lipids or fatty material 
•  Vitamins 
•  Trace metals 
•  Oxygen 
 
 
 
1A .5.9.Wort Cooling and Aeration  
 
(a) Wort Cooling. 
 
The wort must be cooled prior to yeast being added.  The optimum temperature for 
the start of fermentation, depending on the yeast s train, will be between15 to 25 ºC.  
 
Although in the past, vertical open coolers were co mmon, today the plate heat 
exchanger is almost universally used. This is becau se:- 
 
•  Plate heat exchangers are very efficient and can c ool the wort down in a short 
time. There is a large plate surface area for wort/ coolant and the liquids’ flow 
across the surface is very fast 
•  Nearly all the heat from the wort can be recovered  to generate a hot water supply 
for brewing and other production uses. 
•  They are enclosed and are easy to clean in line. T herefore they keep the wort 
sterile. 
 
The principles of how the plate heat exchanger work s are illustrated in the diagrams 
below:-  
20 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.5. Mashing in Malt Whisky 
Distilleries  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
  
  
Plate heat exchanger 
Hot wort in 
Hot water out 
Cold wort out 
Cold water in 
Plates 
 
 
 
Cold 
water in 
Cold wort out 
Hot wort in 
Hot water out 
 
 
 
The wort that leaves the cooling system is now read y for the next stage of 
fermentation. It should have the following characte ristics:- 
 
•  The required mixture of sugars, most of which will  ferment into alcohol  
•  It should contain soluble protein. Barley protein will have been broken down into 
soluble form, for example into amino acids. Soluble  protein is required in the wort 
because it provides food for the yeast. 
•  A temperature that suits the yeast and encourages a start to fermentation. 
•  Absence of any spoilage micro-organisms. 
•  Traces of materials like calcium and zinc which ar e essential for healthy yeast 
growth.  
•  Other nutrients that will encourage yeast growth, for example oxygen. 
 
 
(b) Wort Oxygenation / Aeration.  
 
Yeast needs oxygen to encourage growth and the wort  cooling stage is the ideal time 
for aeration. Unlike brewing where air or liquid ox ygen is injected into the cooled wort 
stream, the small batches of malt wort are aerated naturally as the wort is pumped 
into the wash back. 
 
 
 
 