1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 1 
Overview and Glossary 
 
1. Overview of the Manufacture of Potable Distilled Spirits  
Module 1 of the Diploma in Distilling requires know ledge of the processes used to 
produce the main types of potable spirit consumed w orldwide. These are defined 
below, and are categorized according to the source of fermentable sugar. 
 
The potable spirits covered by the syllabus include  those manufactured from cereals, 
cane and beet sugar and cane and beet molasses and grapes. Many such 
beverages have different definitions and specificat ions throughout the world and the 
following are some of the most important. 
 
1.1 Grain based spirits 
 
(a) The different styles of whisky 
 
Whiskies are normally blended products. A spirit bl ender needs reliable supplies of a 
number of different spirits, most of which have bee n matured in cask for a number of 
years. The exceptions are whiskies produced in specific distilleries e.g. Scotch Single 
Malt whisky  
 
The reason for the requirement for different spirits is: 
•  so that the taste and aroma of the final blend (in  other words its quality) can 
be made just how the blender intends it to be, and 
•  the quality can be maintained from batch to batch and year to year despite 
any unavoidable changes in the components of the blend. 
 
In practice the blends are made up from the product s of two different types of 
distillery: 
•  batch pot still whiskies made with a deliberately low rectification level of about 
70% ABV and having a distinct, some times strong flavour and 
•  very light whiskies (‘grain whiskies’) made in con tinuously operating column 
stills with relatively high rectification, about 94.5% or above. 
 
A small amount of whisky is made at intermediate re ctification levels such as 80% 
ABV. The amount made is small because such intermed iate rectification level whisky 
is not in high demand by blenders. 
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
There are two broad styles of whisky sold worldwide ; the large volume-selling 
blended whisky brands described above and the much smaller volume of the ‘single 
whiskies’.  
The single whiskies are the product of an individua l distillery, usually operating a malt 
two pot still system but occasionally a grain whisk y is offered as a single. The 
‘singles’ can be from a mash of 100% malted barley or from mashes of malted grains 
and unmalted grains or from 100% unmalted grain. Ap art from barley, the other 
commonly used cereals are maize, wheat and rye. 
The so-called grain whiskies have a delicate whisky  flavour due mainly to their high 
rectification in continuous stills. The pot still w hiskies vary from being very delicate to 
being quite powerful and distinct in flavour. Altho ugh these single whiskies are sold 
individually, most are used to produce the blends. 
 
        (b) Whisky flavour 
 
No individual congener or even group of congeners s upplies a recognisable part of a 
‘typical’ whisky flavour. This has led to the requi rement for a range of single whiskies 
that are different from each other to contribute to  a blend. It is important for these 
single whiskies to keep their flavour constant over  many years. The consequence of 
this is that the distillers of single whiskies do n ot make changes to their distillation 
equipment, particularly to the pot still and its co ndenser. The mode of operation is 
also kept the same as far as possible. 
 
Similar factors apply to the light flavoured grain whiskies: the blender needs these to 
be consistent in flavour over a long period of time . However there is also a 
requirement for the individual grain whiskies to be slightly different from each other. 
 
This wide variation in the style of product is base d on different distillation techniques. 
In the sequence of distillation equipment described below, there is a general trend of: 
•  increasing rectification power and lower congener content, 
•  increasing productivity, the amount of product tha t can be made in a certain 
time period, and 
•  increasing energy conservation by such means as he at recovery. 
 
These trends and changes in technology have to be m ade in the context of retaining 
a constant “character”  in the finished product. It  is therefore essential that distillers 
can define a brand’s character  by flavour profilin g  or by reference to a standard 
bottling of that brand. 
 
       (c) Terminology 
 
Whisky distillers worldwide have their own words fo r various parts of the process and 
more so for their products, and it is useful to be able to translate these terms for 
different whiskies from different regions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
Some examples of these words used are: 
 
 Scotch Whisky North American Whiskey  
‘wash’  is   equivalent to beer  
‘foreshots’    heads 
feints’     tails 
‘lyne arm’    vapour pipe to the condenser 
analyser’ column   stripper column. 
 
These are only a few examples of differing terminol ogy and the reader should refer  
to the extensive Glossary  in the next section of these notes to learn more. 
 
1.1.1. Scotch whisky  – Scotland exports the largest volume of whisky  w orldwide 
and, to avoid counterfeiting, has found it essentia l to protect its unique brands by 
legal definition.  Scotch whisky must therefore be produced in Scotland from natural 
water in a mash of either exclusively malted barley  (Malt Whisky) or a mash of un-
malted cereal and malted barley (Grain Whisky).  Th e enzymes of malted barley 
convert the cereal starch to sugars  
(wort) which are then fermented adiabatically (i.e.  without any temperature control) 
by yeast.  
 
In Malt Whisky and some Grain Whisky distilleries t he wort is first separated from 
spent grains or may be fermented in the presence of  the cereal residues (most Grain 
Whisky).  
 
Any un-malted cereal may be used in Scotch Grain Wh isky but the two cereals 
presently used are wheat or maize. The fermented wo rt (wash) is distilled in a batch 
process using pot stills (Malt Whisky) or continuou sly in column stills (Grain Whisky) 
to an alcohol concentration of less than 94.8%. The  new-make spirit (NMS) is then 
reduced to an alcoholic strength of between 60% and  70% and matured in oak 
casks, not exceeding 700 litres in capacity, for a minimum period of 3 years.   
 
However, malt whisky from a single distillery (Sing le Malt) or blended malt whiskies 
from a range of distilleries (Vatted Malt Whisky) a re usually matured for 8 to 15 
years. Grain Whisky is nearly always blended with M alt Whisky (Blended Scotch 
Whisky) of the same or older age (usually 5 to 8 years).  
 
Finally, Scotch Whisky must be bottled in Scotland at a minimum strength of 40% 
alcohol by volume (%ABV) 
 
1.1.2. Other whiskeys  – Malt and grain whiskey is distilled in many othe r countries, 
but not always with a strict legal definition.  
American whiskey can have both a Federal legal defi nition as well as a regional 
designation, e.g.  Kentucky Bourbon must be a disti llate of a fermented mash which 
contained not less than 70% corn (maize) and must h ave been matured in charred 
new oak containers for not less than 2 years in the state of Kentucky.  
Similarly Tennessee whiskey is distilled from a fer mented mash that contained about 
80% corn, 10% rye and 10% malted barley.  
 
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
Other North American whiskeys may have the designat ion of the principal un-malted 
cereal used, such as Corn Whiskey (Bourbon), which usually has a grist composition 
of approximately 70% corn, 15% rye and 15% malted barley.  
 
Rye Whiskey on the other hand must contain at least  51% rye with the rest of the 
grist consisting of corn (ca. 39%) and malted barley (ca. 10%).  
 
The main processing difference for non-Scotch whisk ey is that bacterial or fungal 
enzymes (i.e. non indigenous enzymes) may be used t o convert the cereal starch to 
fermentable sugars (unless it has a designated gris t composition which includes 
malted barley). Fermentation of the fermented cerea l extract (beer) is similar to 
Scottish practice, except that temperature control is commonly used.   
 
Both pot and column stills are used to distil the w ash/beer although column 
continuous distillation is the commoner practice.  
 
In some countries there may also be no stipulation on length of maturation; e.g. some 
Japanese whiskey has been made by the blending of m atured Malt Whiskey with a 
grain new-make spirit. Irish whiskey is traditional ly made from a mixed grist of malted 
and un-malted barley and is triple distilled in large pot-stills. 
 
1.1.3. Grain neutral  spirit  -  Neutral spirit is essentially an odourless and tasteless 
spirit distilled from a fermented mash of 100% cere al grain. The minimum alcoholic 
strength in the UK is 96% ABV but may vary in other countries. The common factor is 
that neutral spirit must be free from congeners whi ch would impart a distinctive odour 
or taste. Such spirits can then be used as the base  for potable spirits by the addition 
of flavourings, e.g. vodka, gin, and many liqueurs. 
 
 
1.2. Sugar and Molasses based spirits 
 
1.2.1. Rum  -   Rum is a spirit drink produced exclusively by alcoholic fermentation 
and distillation either from molasses or syrup prod uced in the manufacture of cane 
sugar or from sugar cane juice itself, and distille d at <96% abv so that the distillate 
has the discernible specific  organoleptic characteristics of rum.  
This is the definition used by the Caribbean rum di stillers (CARICOM) who represent 
the world’s largest producers of this spirit. Unlik e European legislation some 
Caribbean countries do allow the addition of flavou rings as well as that of caramel for 
adjusting the colour of heavy rums. 
 
In the USA rum is defined as: “an alcoholic distillate from the fermented juice of sugar 
cane, sugar-cane syrup, sugar- cane molasses or other sugar-cane  
by-products, produced at not less than 190 0 proof (95% ABV), in such a manner that 
the distillate possesses  the taste, aroma and char acteristics generally attributed to 
rum, and bottled at not less than 80 0 proof (40% ABV), and also includes mixtures 
solely of such distillates”.  
This definition is fairly unspecific and does not i nclude any   stipulation regarding 
maturation in oak barrels or any restriction to country of origin.  
 
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
The equivalent regulation in the UK, on the other h and, does state that rum is: “a 
spirit distilled directly from sugar-cane products in sugar-cane-growing countries”.  
 
European legislation now regulates on the basis for  rum to be distilled <96% from 
sugar cane juice or sugar cane molasses. The only a dditive allowed by the EU is the 
addition of caramel to adjust the colour of heavy rum.  
Fermentation can be from naturally occurring yeasts  and bacteria in the molasses 
feed stock or with cultured yeast and bacteria. In some countries still residues 
(stillage) are allowed to ferment by natural bacter ial infection to produce “dunder” 
which is then added back (backset) to subsequent molasses fermentations.  
 
Such bacterial fermentations add desirable congener ic acids and esters to the 
alcoholic yeast fermentation, particularly for heav y rums. However this traditional 
Caribbean practice is now seldom used. 
 
As in whisk(e)y distilling, both pot stills (for he avily flavoured rums) and column stills 
(for light rums), or even combinations of both, are  used but most rum distillers now 
use only column stills.  
 
Maturation in cask can be from zero to two years, a lthough some Caribbean rum can 
be matured longer and individual countries may have  minimum ageing specifications. 
Bottling strength is normally 37.5% to 40%ABV.  
Flavoured spirits made from sugar cane products can not be called rum per se. but 
may be prefixed by specific descriptors such as “spiced” rum. 
 
 
1.2.2. Molasses neutral spirit   - Very few rum distillers produce neutral spirit f rom 
molasses. As in grain neutral spirit, that derived from sugar based fermentations is 
odourless, tasteless and at an alcoholic strength of >96%.  
 
Again the general characteristic is that multiple c olumn distillation removes all 
undesirable congeneric acids, alcohols and esters. The neutral spirit so produced 
forms a base for the same range of potable spirits mentioned in par. 1.1.3 above. 
 
 
1.2.3. The different styles of rum 
 
The reason for the requirement for different spirits is: 
•  so that the taste and aroma of the final blend (in  other words its quality) can 
be made just how the blender intends it to be, and 
•  the quality can be maintained from batch to batch and year to year despite 
any unavoidable changes in the components of the blend. 
 
There are two broad styles of rum sold worldwide - the large volume selling white 
rums and the much smaller volume of the dark rums. The white rums are generally 
called the ‘light’ rums because their flavour impac t is very light and delicate. In 
contrast, some of the dark rums have a massive flavour impact.  
There are rums that fall between these two extremes of flavour. 
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
           (a) Rum flavour and rectification 
The flavour of rum, like any other spirit, is deter mined by its congener content. A 
group of compounds called esters is responsible for  part of the typical rum flavour. 
These esters vary in their volatility, those of rel atively high volatility such as ethyl 
acetate and those of lower volatility such as ethyl decanoate.  
 
In general, the further a spirit is rectified, the more of the lower volatility congeners 
are left behind. Thus, the very light flavoured whi te rums are much more highly 
rectified than the heavily flavoured dark rums. 
In the past, internationally traded rums used to be  classified by their ‘ester number’, 
the content of the esters in mg per 100 ml of pure alcohol. Heavy rums have ester 
numbers in the range of 200 to 400 mg/100ml pure alcohol; light rums 60 to 120. 
 
The heavy rums contain a wide range of different es ters; the lighter ones contain the 
same esters but at much lower levels. In contrast t he white rums have a low content 
of esters, almost all of which is the most volatile ester, ethyl acetate. 
 
This wide variation in the style of product is base d on different distillation techniques 
and there is a general trend of 
•  increasing rectification power and lower congener content, 
•  increasing productivity, the amount of product tha t can be made in a certain 
time period, and 
•  increasing energy conservation by such means as he at recovery. 
 
 
1.3. Grape spirits 
 
The range of brandy styles produced worldwide is pr obably greater than that of rum. 
Apart from some general descriptions below, the cur rent syllabus is therefore 
restricted to spirit produced from the fermentation  of grape juice (must) and excludes 
brandy made from the juice of any other fruits. 
 
1.3.1. The use of the word ‘brandy’ 
The word ‘brandy’ is used for many alcoholic bevera ges around the world. These 
brandies belong in one of the following two groups: 
 
1. brandy distilled from the fermented juice, the w ine, of the grape species   
      Vitis  vinifera  and 
2.  brandy distilled from the fermented juice of ot her fruits such as apples, plums 
or cherries. 
 
(a) Brandies from the grape 
Most of the brandy that is made worldwide is distil led from wine.(ef. Par. 1.3.4) This 
includes cognac and armagnac from France and many o ther products from all of the 
wine producing regions of the world. This section d eals with general descriptions of 
this large group of  brandies. 
 
However, the generic name “brandy” can also include  products made from grape 
residues.. Such brandies are distilled from fermented grape debris and wine lees  
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
remaining after wine production. Examples of these are the French ‘marc’ and the 
Italian ‘grappa’. Similar products are now made in many parts of the world.   
 
These are not covered specifically in this course b ut the distillation principles 
described in this section are very similar to those  needed to understand fruit brandy 
production apart from the extraction and preparation of the fermentable juice. 
 
(b) Fruit brandies 
Brandies in the second group are called the ‘fruit brandies’ to distinguish them from 
the brandies made from grapes. The fruit brandies are made in any part 
 of the world where suitable high sugar fruit occur s. This is generally in areas not 
warm enough for grape production such as the foothills of mountain  
ranges from the USA through Europe to the Himalayas . Calvados and applejack 
(from apples), slivovitz (from plums) and Kirsch (f rom cherries) are types of fruit 
brandy. 
 
The fruit brandy distiller has to be aware of the o ther constituents of the fruit in 
addition to the sugar. For instance in apple brandy  distillations care has to be taken 
to avoid excessive levels of methanol originating f rom the apple pectin. Methanol is a 
toxic compound and the level of it in any beverage should be very low. Similarly, in 
the stone fruit brandies (plum, cherry etc.) the pr oduction method should not release 
too much benzaldehyde from the crushed stones. This  compound has a powerful 
flavour that is pleasant at levels of about 5 mg/li tre in a fruit brandy, but is unpleasant 
at higher levels.Furthermore, fruit stones can be t he source of significant 
concentrations of the known carcinogen, ethyl carbamate, in these distilled spirits. 
 
1.3.2. Brandy flavour and blending 
 
In some cases, wine is specially produced for disti lling and in other cases it is not. In 
addition to the alcohol content, the distiller has to check that the wine has a suitable 
flavour for distillation. The most important factor  is the absence of a ‘musty’ flavour 
note. ‘Musty’ flavour compounds can distil over into the brandy.  
 
In South Africa, the requirements of a rebate wine,  apart from the legal ones, are that 
it must have a lack of Muscat, mousy or musty flavo urs and must not have a high 
volatile acid content, whereas Class A spirit, or n eutral spirit, which make up 70% of 
what brandy is distilled from can be any bad wine a s long as it contains alcohol from 
grape origin. 
Brandy is normally a blended product. 
 
A spirit blender needs reliable supplies of a numbe r of different spirits, most of which 
may have been matured in cask. The reason for the r equirement for different spirits 
is: 
•  so that the taste and aroma of the final blend (in  other words its quality) can 
be made just how the blender intends it to be, and 
•  the quality can be maintained from batch to batch and year to year despite 
any unavoidable changes in the components of the blend. 
 
In some regions, blending with neutral spirit is al lowed, in others it is not. For 
instance, brandies in the EU can contain up to 50% of column still distillate collected  
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
at no more than 94.8%ABV. Such distillate will have  very light brandy flavour 
whereas neutral spirit would have no detectable flavour. 
 
1.3.3. Brandy flavour and rectification 
 
The flavour of brandy, like any other spirit, is de termined by its congener content. 
Brandies contain very many different congeners that  contribute to produce the typical 
brandy flavour. These congeners belong to the chemi cal families of esters, acids, 
alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, sulphur compounds and  so on. They vary in their 
volatility, those of relatively high volatility such as 
acetaldehyde and those of lower volatility such as ethyl decanoate. In general, the 
further a spirit is rectified, the more of the lower volatility congeners are left behind.  
 
Thus, the light flavoured brandies are more highly rectified than the heavily flavoured 
ones. The heavily flavoured ones will also probably  need a longer maturation period 
to reach their most acceptable flavour. 
 
In the cognac region of France, the production of t he spirit is very closely controlled 
within defined limits. This is to maintain the styl e and quality of the spirit that is 
allowed to carry the name ‘cognac’. For instance, cognac can only be produced using 
the traditional pot still process. In some other re gions, there is little or no control over 
style and lightly flavoured fast-maturing spirits are made. 
 
This variation in the style of product is based on different distillation techniques and 
there is a general trend of: 
•  increasing rectification power and lower congener content, 
•  increasing productivity, the amount of product tha t can be made in a certain 
time period, and 
•  increasing energy conservation by such means as he at recovery. 
 
For recognised international brands, the same cavia ts for character retention 
previously discussed for whisky and rum are equally  important for brandy when 
considering any changes to manufacturing procedures. 
 
1.3.4. Grape wine brandy – It is generally accepted that if the term “brandy ” is used 
without a qualifying descriptor (e.g. plum brandy) it means that it is a potable spirit 
made by the distillation of fermented grape juice ( wine). Legal definitions of brandy 
can either be very specific or non-existent.  
 
In France, for example, the terms cognac and armagn ac can only be applied to 
brandy made from specific grape varieties grown in specified regions of Cognac and 
Armagnac.  
 
Fermentation of the must can take place naturally f rom the wild yeasts that exist in 
the grape skin “bloom” or by the addition of cultur ed yeast. The small amount of 
solids in the crushed grape must can either be left  in situ  (common practice in 
France) or removed (common practice in South Africa).  
Similarly must treatment to inhibit microbial conta mination (sulphiting) or the addition 
of yeast nutrients may be allowed or disallowed according to different traditions.  
 
9 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
Distillation for the best brandy is carried out by double distillation in small pot stills 
(alembic stills) as in Cognac but larger pot stills  are common in other countries. It is 
also part of the legal definition of cognac distill ation that the alembic stills are heated 
by direct firing.  
 
Maturation in oak casks and back blending of aged s pirit play a major role in defining 
different qualities of brandy.  Young brandies are classified in France as Very Special 
(VS) or Very Special Old Pale (VSOP) after a minimu m of two and four years of 
maturation respectively. Napoleon brandy has to be matured for a minimum of six 
years and Extra (XO) for between six and twenty yea rs. The oldest brandies Vielle 
Reserve (VR) and Vieux are laid down for anything between seven and forty years.  
Bottling strength for standard brandy is usually 40% ABV. 
 
1.3.5. Grape Neutral spirit  – It is becoming increasingly common for surplus w ine to 
be refined in double column stills to neutral spiri t with the same definition as the 
above spirits from grain and molasses.  
With wine production outstripping demand in many EU  countries this is now a major 
source of high strength neutral spirit for the many  types of vodka, gin and liqueurs 
produced throughout the continent of Europe.  
 
Similarly in other countries where there may be a s urplus of wine grapes or wine 
production, distillation of neutral spirit may be e ssential for providing feedstock for 
other potable spirits.  
 
10 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
2. Glossary of Technical Terminology 
 
 
The language used to describe distilling technology can vary from country to country 
and from one tradition of distilling to another. The commonest terms used throughout 
this syllabus and the associated teaching materials are defined as follows : 
A 
 
ABV  The standard method of measuring the concentration  of ethyl 
alcohol (ethanol) in water. The units are percentage (%) Alcohol 
By Volume. 
 
Acetaldehyde   An unwanted flavor compound produced as a co-prod uct 
(congener) of fermentation and distillation. 
 
Acetic Acid   An organic acid (Vinegar) also produced as a cong ener of 
fermentation and distilling. 
  
Acetobacter  A contaminating bacteria responsible for producing  acetic acid. 
 
Aeration  The mixing of air with liquid but usually  means  mixing with wort. 
 
Aerobic/anaerobic  With or without the presence of oxygen 
 
Alcohol  There are different types of alcohol but generally  refers to the 
principal product of fermenting sugar with yeast. Proper chemical 
name is ethyl alcohol or ethanol (C 2H5OH). Absolute alcohol 
(anhydrous ethanol) is generally defined as having less than 1% 
water. 
 
Alembic   Alternative term for a pot still (q.v.), especial ly in brandy 
distillation. 
 
Aleurone layer  A layer of cells under the skin of barley responsi ble for the 
production of enzymes which can break down starch to 
fermentable sugars. 
 
Alkali   Opposite of acid, alkalis have high pH (q.v.)  Strong alkalis are 
commonly used as sterilising agents because. of their anti-
microbial effects. 
11 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Amyl alcohol   A higher alcohol (q.v.) normally produced in greatest amount 
during fermentation, and therefore the principal component of 
the fusel oil (q.v.) collected during distillation. 
 
Amino acids  The individual molecules which make up protein. Th ey are 
essential for yeast growth. 
 
Amylase  Collective term for two types (Alpha and Beta) of enzyme which 
break down starch molecules to fermentable sugars. 
  
Analyser column Primary continuous-distillation column for separating 
(“stripping”) alcohol from fermented beer/wash/wine . 
 
Anti-collapse valve Safety valve on pot stills, mainly to prevent damage by vacuum 
developing during discharge of spent contents at the end of 
distillation, but some types also relieve pressure above 
atmospheric. 
 
Aroma  Characteristics (e.g. of distilled spirit) as asse ssed by the sense 
of smell, i.e. by sensory receptors in the nose. 
 
Attenuation  A measure of the fermentability of wort, molasses or must. 
 
Azeotrope The mixture of 97% alcohol, 3% water which is the highest 
alcohol concentration possible in distillation at atmospheric 
pressure, because of the attraction forces between the alcohol 
and water molecules. 
 
B 
 
Backset Recycled stillage which may be added either to the fermenter or 
to the cooker and serves as a source of nutrients. Reduces the 
amount of water used for mashing and the amount of liquid 
residue. Can be a source of bacterial contamination. 
 
Bacteria  A family of microscopic living organisms. 
 
Barbet still Type of continuous still in which the rectifier column (q.v.) has a 
separate top section for separation, and venting-off, of 
undesirable highly-volatile flavour compounds. 
  
Barley  Cereal used to make malt by a process of controlle d 
germination. 
12 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Barrel  An oak cask which can contain 36 gallons (164 litr es) of spirit. 
 
Batch distillation Distilling batches of beer or wine in pot stills in a discontinuous 
manner - for example, the pot still is filled, the alcohol and part of 
the water is distilled off and collected, the pot still residue is 
discarded and whole process can then be done again 
 
Beer  Fermented extract of malt or cereals (see also was h). 
 
Beer column  The primary continuous-distillation column for sep arating alcohol 
from fermented molasses or cereal wort.  Same as analyser 
column (q.v.), beer still, stripper column (q.v.). 
 
Blended Scotch   Blend of Scotch malt and grain whiskies. 
 
Bonded warehouse   In the context of Scotch whisky, the building for  storage of 
casks for maturation.  Since UK duty is not paid until packaging, 
a Customs & Excise bond is required to guarantee eventual 
payment. 
 
Blending  The mixing of different types of spirit to produce  a specified 
quality. 
 
Bloom  A deposit of micro-organisms, including yeast, fou nd on the 
skins of fruit, most commonly grapes. 
 
BOD  Biological Oxygen Demand. A measure used to determine the 
concentration of effluent in terms of the amount of oxygen 
required for microbiological oxidation. 
 
Bonne chauffe New-make spirit, usually used to denote brandy 
 
Botanicals  Mixture of fruits and herbs used for flavouring gi n, either by 
distillation or by addition as an essence. For both methods, the 
flavour of juniper berries is an obligatory component of the 
mixture. 
 
Bourbon whiskey  Grain whisky (q.v.) produced from a cereal mash containing not 
less than 51% maize, and distilled and matured in U.S.A. under 
specified conditions. 
 
Brix (degrees)  Standard measurement of sugar concentration (1 oBrix = 1% 
sugar by weight) used for grape must and molasses wort. Also 
termed “ Balling ” in some countries. 
 
Brouillis Product of the first pot still, same as low wines (q.v.) 
13 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
Brown spirits   General term for spirits, principally brandy, rum  and whisky, 
which have extracted colour from the cask during maturation. 
 
Butt  Oak cask, originally containing sherry, with a cap acity of 500 
litres. 
 
C 
 
Calorie  A measure of heat energy. 
 
Carbohydrate  Literally means any group of compounds containing carbon, 
hydrogen and oxygen. In distilling it is a general term for all 
sugars and polymers of sugars. 
 
Carbon Dioxide  The second main product of fermentation after etha nol (CO 2). 
 
Cask A barrel used to store and to mature spirits. 
 
Charring  Process of burning the inside of oak casks. 
 
CIP  Equipment for Cleaning In Place. 
 
COD  Chemical Oxygen Demand. Another way of measuring the 
strength of effluent in terms of amount of oxygen required for 
oxidation by  chemical reagents. 
 
Coffey still Type of continuous still in which the beer (wash) feed to the top 
plate of the analyser column is pre-heated by passage through 
coils within the rectifier column. The additional reflux from the 
wash coils within the rectifier is believed to be advantageous. 
  
Condenser  Heat exchanger for condensing vapour to the liquid phase. 
 
Congener  Term commonly used in the potable spirits industries for the 
flavour compounds other than ethyl alcohol, which are derived 
from the raw materials, or developed during fermentation or 
maturation. 
  
Continuous (column) still   As used for distillation of potable spirits, comm only 
constructed as two columns (analyser and rectifier, (q.v.) 
containing 30 or more perforated plates (sieve plates, q.v.) on 
which approximately 5 cm depth of liquid is supported by the 
upward flow of hot vapour.  The components of the feed of 
fermented beer/wash are  
                                 separated in the rectifier column according to their volatility. 
14 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
  
Cooker  Vessel in which cereals are heated with water (usu ally under 
pressure) before adding to a mash. 
 
Cooper  Person who builds and maintains casks. 
  
Cooperage   Involves both the construction of casks from the individual 
curved staves (planks) bound by steel hoops and the repair and 
rejuvenation (q.v.) of casks between successive fillings. 
 
Co-products  By-products of the operation of the distillery whi ch have 
commercial value, e.g. carbon dioxide from fermentation can be 
purified and compressed for sale as liquid or solid CO 2. 
 
Cultured yeast  Specific strains of yeast which are grown artifici ally in the 
laboratory before being multiplied up for pitching. 
 
Cut point Point at which the still operator changes between the different 
fractions of a distillation. 
 
Cytoplasm Water like substance which fills a yeast cell and in which various 
organelles (c.v.) are suspended. Many of the enzymes and 
metabolites (c.v.) necessary for the functioning and growth of the 
yeast cell are dissolved in the cytoplasm which is 80% water. 
 
D 
 
Dark grains  Combined spent grain and non-volatile residue from whisky 
distillation (both grain, and the wash still of malt), dried to form 
animal feed.  
 
Demister Metal mesh or perforated plate above the top sieve plate of the 
analyser column (q.v.) of a continuous still to prevent liquid 
droplets passing to the rectifier column (q.v.) in the hot spirit 
vapour. 
 
Demister test  Alternative name for Misting test  (q.v.). 
 
Dephlegmator Same as a demister (q.v.) 
 
Diacetyl Butter-flavoured compound produced by yeast fermentation, also 
by growth of lactic acid bacteria.  Since diacetyl is of similar 
volatility to ethyl alcohol, it is impossible to remove completely by 
distillation. 
15 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Diastase  Collective term for the mixture of malt enzymes th at break down 
starch during mashing. 
 
 Diastatic power   Laboratory measurement of the amylase (q.v.) acti vity of malt. 
 
Dextrin  The fragments of starch which cannot be further br oken down to 
fermentable sugar by the action of amylase (often called Limit 
Dextrin because they represent the limit of amylase activity). 
 
Distillation  The process of concentrating alcohol by boiling  a nd condensing 
the resulting vapours. 
 
Downcomer A downpipe which allows liquid to descend from one plate in a 
column still to another. 
 
Draff Spent grain from the mash tun of a whisky distillery.  A valuable 
co-product, sold as animal feed, either alone or mixed with pot 
ale (q.v.) and dried to form pellets. 
 
Dunder Caribbean term for the non-volatile residue from rum distillation, 
which during storage supports the growth of a mixture of micro-
organisms.  When stored dunder is added with yeast to a 
subsequent fermentation, these organisms provide a richer 
flavour to the rum than would yeast alone.  
 
 
E 
 
Embryo The germ of a cereal grain seed. The part that would grow into 
an “embryonic” plant. 
 
Endosperm  The part of a cereal grain which holds the food re serve of the 
seed. 
 
Enterobacteria A family of bacteria which can grow in wort, particularly one 
called Obesumbacterium proteus , and cause off-flavours such 
as dimethyl sulphide.  The family also contains the pathogenic 
organism Salmonella , which fortunately are not found in distilling. 
 
Entrainment   In distillation, the carry-over of liquid or solids with the spirit 
vapour, which contaminates the distilled product.  This can affect 
vapour passing from a pot still to its condenser, or from the 
analyser to rectifier (q.v.) of a continuous distillation system. 
16 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Enzyme  Catalyst (q.v.) of biological origin, usually spec ific protein from 
malt or yeast.  The fermentation of sugar to alcohol is carried out 
by a succession of enzymic reactions within the yeast cells. 
 
Ester  A class of compound formed by the chemical combina tion of an 
acid and an alcohol, produced in small amounts by yeast during 
fermentation.  Many esters have a fruity aroma.  Having similar 
volatility to ethyl alcohol, they are distilled with the spirit. 
 
Ethyl carbamate   Carcinogenic (cancer-causing) compound which can be present 
in many food products, including alcoholic beverages, in trace 
amounts.  In distilled spirits, it is most likely to be derived from 
cyanide compounds in the raw materials. 
 
Essential oils  Extracts of gin botanicals used for producing comp ound gin. 
 
Ethanol  The chemical name for the principal alcohol produc ed by 
fermenting sugar (see also ethyl alcohol). 
 
Ethyl alcohol  Alternative term for ethanol. 
 
Exogenous enzymes  Enzymes which exist outside living cells and which  can be 
isolated, concentrated and used for industrial purposes. 
 
Extract  A measure of the amount of material that can be di ssolved from 
raw materials. 
 
F 
 
Feed plate The sieve plate (q.v.) at which the beer/wine/wash feed enters a 
continuous still.  In practice, this is usually the top plate of the 
analyser column (q.v.). 
 
Feints (tails)  The final fraction after pot distillation of spiri t, with unacceptably 
high content of low-volatile flavour components, recycled to the 
next distillation to recover the significant alcohol content. 
 
Fermentable sugars  The compounds that are converted by yeast fermenta tion 
to alcohol and carbon dioxide: principally fructose, glucose and 
sucrose from grapes and molasses, and glucose, maltose and 
maltotriose from cereals. 
  
17 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Fermentation  The process whereby yeast converts sugars into eth anol and 
carbon dioxide. 
 
Final gravity   Specific gravity (q.v.) at the end of fermentatio n. 
 
Flavour  Although often considered to include aroma (q.v.),  the strict 
interpretation of the word implies the characteristics (e.g. of 
distilled spirit) as assessed by the sense of taste, by receptors 
on the tongue. 
 
Foreshots (heads) The first fraction of Scotch whisky spirit distillation, recycled 
because of the high content of unacceptable highly-volatile 
flavour components. (also known as heads in brandy and rum 
distillation). 
 
Fructose  A very sweet simple sugar present in many fruits. Forms sucrose 
when linked to a molecule of glucose. 
 
Fungus  A family of micro-organisms which include yeast. 
 
Fusel oil   Mixture of alcohols of greater molecular weight ( q.v.) than ethyl 
alcohol e.g. butanol and amyl alcohol.  A useful co-product (q.v.) 
used as an industrial solvent. 
 
Fusel oil decanter Device for separating fusel oil and alcohol drawn from the lower 
section of the rectifier of a continuous distillation system by 
mixing with water, in which fusel oil is poorly soluble, and then 
decanting off the fusel oil layer. 
 
Fusel oil still Alternative to decanter - a small auxiliary still fed from the lower 
section of the rectifier column to separate fusel oils from alcohol 
by distillation and return the alcohol to the main still. 
 
G 
 
Gelatinisation  The process of making starch soluble in water and hence 
accessible to enzymes. 
 
Germination  The growth of seeds. (See also malting). 
 
Glucose  A simple sugar molecule which , when linked togeth er in a 
specific , make up the polymer molecules of starch. Maltose is 
composed of two molecules of glucose linked in this manner and 
maltotriose is three glucose units linked in the same way. 
GNS G rain  N eutral  S pirit  - neutral spirit (q.v.) derived from cereal 
crops 
18 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Grapes  The fruits of the species of vine, Vitis vinifera , which are used for 
wine making. 
 
Green Malt  Germinated barley before it is dried on kiln. 
 
Grind  The degree to which malt or cereals are milled. 
 
Grist  A term for crushed (milled) malt and cereals befor e being 
mashed with water. 
 
H 
 
Heads  The first fraction of spirit distillation, discard ed or recycled 
because of high content of unacceptable flavour components.  In 
continuous distillation, the highly-volatile components of the spirit 
vapour which accumulate at the top of the rectifier (q.v.) are also 
known as heads 
 (also known as foreshots in Scotch malt whisky distillation). 
 
Heat exchanger  General term for a device for heating or cooling a  process fluid.  
Two of the various examples of heating in distilling are (a) 
beer/wash pre-heaters for heating the charge to a pot still by 
spent beer/wash of the previous distillation or (b) heating the 
charge to a continuous still by the vapour of the current 
distillation.  As an example of cooling, the traditional condenser 
both condenses the spirit vapour and then cools the spirit by a 
flow of cold water. 
 
Higher alcohols  Alternative name for the alcohols of higher molecular weight 
(q.v.) than ethyl alcohol which are present in fusel oil (q.v.). 
 
Hogshead  A cask with a capacity of  246 litres (54 gallons)  usually re-
constructed from American bourbon barrels by addition of 
additional staves and larger heads. 
 
Hydro-extractive (or hydro-selective) distillation 
Continuous distillation process to purify distilled spirit.  Streams 
of spirit and hot water, into which the unwanted flavour 
components are selectively extracted, are fed into the column, 
and alcohol of high purity is distilled off. 
 
Hydrolysis  The biological process whereby enzymes break down starch to 
fermentable sugars and dextrin Alternative term for 
saccharification (q.v.) to simple fermentable sugars. 
19 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Hydrometer  Instrument, usually glass, in the form of a sealed tube above an 
accurately weighted bulb.  The tube is calibrated in oBrix or 
specific gravity (q.v.) to show the strength of the solution in which 
the hydrometer is floating. 
 
I 
 
Infusion  Term for a single temperature mash. 
 
Inoculation Addition of yeast culture to grape must or cereal/molasses wort 
to carry out the fermentation.  ( see also pitching ). 
 
K 
 
Kilning  The process of drying malted barley 
 
L 
 
Lactic Acid  An acid produced by contaminations of Lactobacillus  bacteria in 
yeast fermentations. 
 
Lactobacillus  A common type of bacteria contaminating fermentati ons. 
 
Lag phase  The early stage of fermentation when there is very  little yeast 
growth. 
 
Lauter tun In the malt whisky industry, a form of mash tun (q.v.) in which the 
wort is filtered through the bed of grain lying on perforated 
plates.  (N.B. the lauter tun of a brewery has a different 
purpose). 
 
Legionella  A bacteria which can cause lung infections. Often found in 
cooling towers. 
  
Lipids  A collective term for fatty materials found on mal t and cereals. 
 
Litres pure alcohol  Unit of measurement of distillery production, expressed as 
the equivalent amount of 100% ethanol.  A still which produced 
3000 litres of 70% alcohol would be recorded as producing 3000 
x 70/100 = 2100 lpa. 
 
Log phase  The stage of fermentation when there is rapid yeas t growth. 
20 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Low wines Product of the first stage of whisky distillation in pot stills, typical 
alcohol content about 20% by volume. Also known as brouillis 
(q.v.) 
 
Lyne arm (Lye pipe) Vapour pipe connecting the head of the still to the 
condenser. 
 
 
M 
 
Maize  A cereal grain which can be used for mashing. Corn  in North 
American terminology. 
 
Malt  Term for cereal (usually barley) that has been ste eped in water 
and allowed to germinate before being kiln dried. 
 
Malting  The process of steeping, germinating and kilning b arley grains in 
order to synthesise enzymes which modify the endosperm to 
release starch grains. These enzymes are preserved by kilning 
and subsequently convert starch to fermentable sugar in a mash. 
 
Maltose  The main fermentable sugar produced by the action of amylase 
on starch. It consists of 2 glucose molecules linked together. 
 
Malt whisky  Whisky prepared from a mash of malted barley, but details of 
production vary between whisky/whiskey-producing countries. 
 
Marc The residue left after pressing the fermented juice from the 
grape residue and comprising the skins, seeds and stalks. Also 
known as grape pomace. Marc is often used to produce grape 
spirit, also known as marc and short for “eau de vie de marc”.  
 
Mashing  The process of mixing grist (usually milled malt) with hot water in 
order to activate enzymes which  convert starch to fermentable 
sugars. 
 
Mash Filtration  The process of removing soluble extract from resid ual raw 
material. 
 
Mash tun Vessel for extraction of fermentable sugar from milled malt, or a 
mixture of malt and cooked cereal. 
21 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Maturation Storage of spirit in wood (usually oak) casks to allow removal of 
unwanted flavour components and to develop an improved 
flavour by chemical reactions between  
                                 flavour components of the spirit and the wood of the cask, also 
by reaction with atmospheric oxygen  diffusing into the cask. 
 
Measurable cyanides  Since cyanides are the origin of ethyl carbamate (q.v.) it 
is important to measure their presence in raw materials and 
choose those of lowest possible content.  (These cyanides, if 
present, are at extremely low levels, far below the well-known 
toxic effect of cyanide). 
 
Medium  Nutrient material on which to grow microbes in the  laboratory. 
 
Metabolite Any organic compound which is necessary for the functioning 
and growth of a yeast cell. 
 
 
Methanol (methyl alcohol) Toxic alcohol, of lower molecular weight than ethyl 
alcohol, which is produced in small amount during fermentation 
of cereal or molasses wort. Since it is more volatile, it is removed 
in the foreshots (heads) fraction of spirit distillation.  In brandy 
production, pectin (fruit gum) partly breaks down to methanol 
during fermentation and distillation, therefore it is necessary to 
fractionate both the first and second distillations to remove the 
methanol-containing heads. 
 
Milling Precise grinding of cereal grains prior to the mashing process to 
allow extraction of sugars and other yeast nutrients in the mash 
tun. 
 
Misting test Test carried out on heads/foreshots (q.v.) of a spirit distillation.  
That fraction contains not only the highly volatile congeners; the 
strong (approximately 80%) alcohol dissolves various low-volatile 
oily or waxy compounds coating the interior of the still from late 
in the previous distillation.  Although soluble in 80% alcohol, 
these compounds form a cloudy mist or haze on dilution to 40%.  
Therefore if addition of an equal volume of water to a sample of 
distillate no longer causes misting, the distillate can be collected 
as spirit. 
 
Mitochondrion Organelle (c.v.) which is responsible for generating  
22 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
Molasses Normally understood to mean the syrup of high sugar content 
produced as a by-product of sugar production from beet or cane, 
although similar products are available from other sources.  
Available to distilleries as either “blackstrap” mo lasses (dark 
colour, 40 - 50% solids) and  
                                 “high-test molasses” (pale yellow colour, approximately 80% 
solids, mainly sugar). 
 
Molecular weight Measure of the size of the molecules of a chemical compound. 
 
Must    Juice expressed from grapes for fermentation to w ine. 
 
 
 
N 
 
Natural fermentation Fermentation of grape or molasses worts (q.v.) by yeasts 
and other micro-organisms naturally present in these raw 
materials. 
 
Neutral spirit Spirit obtained from fermented wort of agricultural origin, distilled 
to at least 96% alcohol by volume and with negligible content of 
flavour components. 
 
NMS  New Make Spirit. Alcoholic solution that has immediately 
condensed from a still. For some “white” spirits it  is ready for 
consumption. Most “brown” spirits, maturation is re quired. 
 
Nitrogen  One of the main elements in protein and amino acid s. Nitrogen 
content is a simple way of measuring the amount of protein in 
cereals. 
 
Nucleus Organelle (c.v.) which contains a yeast cell’s genetic material 
and which governs reproduction. 
 
O 
 
Organelle Small body, suspended in the cytoplasm of a yeast cell, 
responsible for carrying out specific functions. 
 
Original gravity  Specific gravity (q.v.) of must/wort before the st art of 
fermentation, i.e. at the time of pitching (q.v.) with yeast . 
 
Oxygen  The gas present in air or dissolved in water which  is essential for 
most living organisms. 
23 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
P 
 
pH The measure of acidity or alkalinity.  pH 7.0 is neutral; values 
between 0 and 6.9 are acid; 7.1 to 14 represents increasing 
alkalinity. 
 
Parameter  The limits of any measurement made to specify a ra w material, 
process or quality of product. 
 
Peat  A naturally occurring brown coal-like material con sisting of 
decomposed plant vegetation. 
 
Pitching (inoculation)  Addition of yeast culture to grape must or 
cereal/molasses wort to carry out the fermentation. 
 
Pitching yeast The yeast culture (or mixture of yeast cultures) for the 
fermentation. 
 
Plate  A perforated tray placed horizontally within a dis tillation column. 
Plates improve the contact between the rising vapour and 
descending liquid in a column still. 
 
Plate heat exchanger  Equipment for cooling or heating up liquids passin g 
through it. 
 
Pot ale Term used in the Scotch whisky industry for the residue in the 
wash still (q.v.) at the end of distillation. 
  
Pot still Vessel, of copper construction, normally used in pairs (or in two 
successive operations) for concentration of alcohol content by 
distillation. 
 
Potable spirit Distilled spirit, usually at least 37.5% alcohol by volume, which is 
approved for human consumption.  
 
Proof degrees Alternative to % alcohol by volume for measurement of alcoholic 
strength of spirits.  Used mainly in U.S.A., where 1 o proof = 0.5% 
abv. 
 
Propagation Term used for the cultivation of yeast for fermentation (although 
most distilleries buy in yeast ready to use). 
Protein  Complex polymer of amino acids which, when broken down, 
provides essential nutrient to yeast. 
 
Proteolysis  The biological process whereby enzymes break down protein to 
amino acids and peptides. 
24 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
R 
 
Raw materials  The material of agricultural origin from which fer mentable 
extracts are made. 
 
Reboiler Heat exchanger, heated by steam, at the base of a column still 
to regenerate steam from the non-volatile fraction.  In distillery 
practice, can only be used for  
                                 streams without solid content, e.g. in vodka distillation columns, 
or in a fusel-oil still (q.v.). 
 
Rectification:  The separation in the components of the vapour mix ture in a 
continuous still. 
 
Rectifier column The second of the two columns of a continuous still system in 
which the individual vapourised components of the beer/wash 
are separated.  Condensed ethanol is drawn off from the “spirit 
plate”, the sieve plate (q.v.) near the top of the still with spirit of 
optimum quality. 
 
Reduction Dilution of spirit with water.  Continuously distilled spirit is too 
strong for maturation and reduction to 63 – 70% alc ohol by 
volume is necessary.  Finally, at packaging, that is reduced to 
sales strength, often (but not always) either 40 or 43%.  The 
quality of the reduction water is important, to prevent 
development of haze or other faults during storage. 
 
Reflux Condensed distillate returning to a lower level of the still system 
(i.e. in batch distillation, to the pot; in continuous distillation, to 
the next lower sieve plate, q.v.). 
 
Reflux ratio Ratio of amount of distillate refluxed to volume of distillate 
collected. 
 
Rejuvenation  Treatment of the inner surface of casks to restore maturation 
activity.  The commonest treatment consists of scraping off about 
3 mm of the exhausted surface and charring the freshly exposed 
wood by a gas flame. 
 
Rummager Scraping device to remove charring from internal heating 
surfaces of directly fired stills 
 
Rye A cereal which can be used in a mash for whisky. 
 particularly in North America. 
25 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
S 
 
Saccharification Enzymic breakdown, either by malt or by microbial enzymes, of 
the complex structure of cereal starch to simple fermentable 
sugars. 
 
Saccharometer  Alternative name for hydrometer (q.v.) to determin e the strength 
of a sugary liquid. 
 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae  The scientific name for the specific type of yeast  
used in distilling. 
  
 
Sanitiser Agent for killing micro-organisms in the cleaning program for 
fermentation vessels, etc. 
 
Sensory evaluation Quality assessment, normally by a panel of trained 
assessors rather than only one person, of the sensory 
characteristics of the product.  For distilled spirits, evaluation is 
normally by aroma (q.v.) alone, i.e. by nosing rather than tasting 
the product. 
 
Shell-and-tube condenser Cylindrical shell with numerous tubes through 
which cooling water passes to condense the spirit vapour from a 
pot still. 
 
Sieve plate (or tray) Perforated plate in column still which allows hot vapour to 
rise up through a layer of liquid to strip out volatile components 
(especially ethyl alcohol, q.v.)   Although not common, some 
designs of pot still have sieve plates in the neck of the still to 
increase reflux and therefore improve rectification. 
 
Sparge  Term used for the process of washing out the extra ct from the 
mash with water (can also mean the liquid used to wash out 
extract e.g. water or low gravity wort from previous mash). 
 
Specific gravity (SG) Measurement (by hydrometer) of the density of a solution, 
in comparison with the density of water expressed as 1000. The 
SG of distillery wort of 10% sugar content is 1040, i.e. 4 o of SG 
corresponds to 1% sugar. 
 
Spent grains Residue from mash tun of a whisky distillery after extraction of 
sugars and other yeast nutrients. A valuable co-product, sold as 
animal feed, either alone or mixed with pot ale (q.v.) and dried to 
form pellets. 
26 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Spent lees Term used in the Scotch whisky industry for the residue in the 
spirit still (q.v.) at the end of distillation.   
 
Spent wash Non-volatile liquid and solid residue from the analyser column of 
a continuous still (the term is particularly associated with whisky 
distillation). 
 
Spirit  High strength solution of ethanol in water 
Spirit safe Sealed box of glass and metal construction in which spirit 
distillate flow can be viewed and strength measured without the 
operator having direct access to the product. 
 
Spirit yield  Yield of spirit, calculated as litres of pure alco hol (q.v.) in 
comparison with the weight of raw material. 
Starch  A polymer of glucose molecules that forms the food  reserve in 
cereal grains. 
 
Starch granule  The form starch takes in the endosperm of cereal g rains. 
 
Steele’s Masher A horizontal screw to mix grist and water to form a homogeneous 
thick mash. 
 
Sterile In microbiology, complete absence of living organisms, so 
Sterilisation  means achieving a state of sterility.  In practice, 
this is rarely possible and so the agents for killing micro-
organisms in the course of cleaning distillery plant (e.g. 
fermentation vessels) are more correctly termed sanitisers (q.v.). 
 
Steeping  The process of adding water to barley grains prior  to 
germination. 
 
Sterilant  Term for chemicals that kill micro-organisms. 
 
Stillage The mixture of unfermented solids and liquid remaining after 
distillation of alcohol from a wash/beer. Thin stillage is the liquid 
portion of stillage which has been separated from the solids by  
screening or centrifugation. In molasses and grape  juice 
distillation the term vinasse may used instead of stillage. 
 
Sucrose  A simple sugar consisting of glucose and fructose.  
 
Swan Neck The top part of a pot still where it turns at about 90 ° and joins 
onto the lyne arm (q.v.) 
27 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
T 
 
Tails  Final fraction of spirit distillation with unacceptably high content 
of low-volatile flavour components, recycled to the next 
distillation to recover the significant alcohol content. Also known 
as Feints in Scotch whisky distillation. 
 
V 
 
Vacuole Organelle (c.v.) that acts as a storage compartment for waste 
products within a yeast cell. 
 
Viability  A measure of the number of live yeast cells in a b atch. 
 
Vitamins  Naturally occurring compounds which are essential for the 
growth of all living organisms. 
 
Volatility The ease with which a liquid can form its vapour. In order to 
separate liquids by distillation, they must have different 
volatilities. For example alcohol is more volatile than water and 
will be concentrated in the vapour phase during distillation. 
 
 
 
W 
 
Wash  Term used in whisky/whiskey distilleries for the product of 
fermentation, i.e. the charge for the wash still (q.v.).  Also known 
as Beer  in some whiskey-producing countries. 
 
Washback Term used in the Scotch whisky industry for the fermentation 
vessel. 
 
Wash still The first still of the pot distillation process for whisky, for 
distillation of fermented wash. 
   
Wheat  A cereal grain which can be used for mashing 
 
“White spirits”  Potable spirits which have not been matured in cask and 
therefore retain the water-clear appearance of the new distillate. 
  
Wild yeast  Any yeast which occurs naturally in the environmen t (see also 
cultured yeast) 
 
Wine  The fermented juice of grapes. 
28 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1: Overview  and Glossary 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Worm condenser Traditional design of condenser, a coil of copper tube immersed 
in cold water, for condensation of vapour from pot stills.  
Although largely superseded by the shell-and-tube design, 
continues in use in some distilleries. Also known as a worn tub. 
 
Wort    Term for the soluble extract of malt and/or cere als. 
 
Y 
 
Yeast A micro-organism used to ferment wort, must or molasses. 
Usually one specific type of yeast is used called Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae  (often abbreviated to S.cerevisiae ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 