1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort 
- Summary 
 
1.  Sources and Types of Molasses 
 
1.1. Molasses, inherent variability and world sugar prices 
 
Molasses (or treacle) is a thick syrup by-product from the processing of sugarcane 
(or sugar beet) into sugar; sometimes “molasses” al so refers to sorghum syrup. 
However, this Elective section will be restricted t o distillation products from the 
use of sugarcane molasses only. 
In this context, “Molasses” is defined as the sugar -containing syrup derived from 
sugar cane, from which no more sugar can be removed  economically. It is also 
called ‘final molasses’ or ‘blackstrap’. 
 
It must be emphasized that the objective of a sugar  refiner is to make a profit from 
making and selling raw sugar. Any money made from m olasses is a welcome but 
small contribution. When the world sugar price is v ery high, it becomes economic 
to recover more sugar from molasses. This leads to the molasses having a 
different composition, lower in sugar and higher in ash (dissolved salts). 
 
In contrast when the world sugar price is very low it might be necessary for the 
refiner to make a product called ‘high-test cane’ o r ‘high-test molasses’. This is 
cane juice concentrated to syrup containing about 8 0% by weight of sugar. It has 
a low content of yeast nutrients including dissolve d salts (sometimes called ‘ash’). 
The dissolved salts can be deposited in the still during distillation, a process called 
‘scaling’. Scale is not easy to remove, so high-tes t cane molasses is excellent for 
distillers to use. 
 
A distiller must always regard molasses as being wh at it is, the co-product of 
another industry. There is little or no incentive f or the producer of sugar to ensure 
that the molasses is always the same. On the contra ry, it is safer for the distiller to 
anticipate that molasses quality will be variable. Variations in molasses are 
caused by: 
•  variation in the sugar cane crop (soil, climate, w ater etc) and 
•  variations in the refining process (different fact ories, different 
process details, world sugar prices etc.) 
 
These variations may be minimised by the distillery  being located near to the 
refinery. Then there could be close communication c oncerning the quality of the 
molasses. Often, this is done by molasses traders who will select and ship  
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
molasses from a molasses-producing region to a mola sses-using region. The 
traders business depends on the molasses being of s uitable quality for the 
distiller. 
 
1.2. Types of Molasses  
 
Sulphured molasses is made from young green sugar c ane and is treated with 
sulphur dioxide, which acts as a preservative durin g the sugar extraction process. 
Unsulphured molasses is made from mature sugar cane  and does not require 
treatment with SO 2 during the extraction process. There are three gra des of 
molasses: 
•  Mild or first molasses,  
•  Dark or second molasses, and 
•  Blackstrap. 
These grades may be sulphured or unsulphured. 
 
Molasses is made from pure sugar cane juice, extrac ted from the harvested cane 
plants, stripped of their leaves, by crushing or ma shing. The juice is boiled to 
concentrate and promote the crystallization of the sugar. The result of the first 
boiling and removal of crystal sugar is first molasses , which has the highest sugar 
content, because comparatively little sugar has bee n extracted from the juice. 
Second molasses  is created from a second boiling and sugar extract ion, and has 
a slight bitter tinge to its taste. 
The third boiling of the sugar syrup gives blackstrap molasses . The majority of the 
sucrose from the original juice has been crystalliz ed, but blackstrap molasses is 
still mostly sugar by calories; however, unlike refined sugars, it contains significant 
amounts of vitamins and minerals (such as calcium, magnesium, potassium and 
iron). 
 
 
1.3.  Molasses as a raw material for distillation 
Only blackstrap molasses is used for distillation a nd all subsequent references to 
molasses imply blackstrap . 
Molasses is a dark coloured syrup containing a sign ificant amount of sugar, often 
in the region of 50% by weight, giving it a specific gravity of about 1.45. 
 
The sugar content makes the syrup viscous (thick an d sticky). The viscosity is 
important because a batch of molasses that is more viscous than usual might be 
difficult to handle in the distillery. Viscosity is  much greater at low temperatures so 
it is necessary to insulate or even heat molasses p ipelines in climates where the 
minimum temperature falls below about 5 oC. 
Distillers use molasses of various types worldwide.  This is because molasses has 
three useful characteristics: 
•  it is a relatively cheap source of fermentable sug ar and 
•  it contains at least some of the yeast nutrients n eeded for the growth of the 
yeast at the start of fermentation plus 
•  it is stable, easy to transport, to store and is r elatively easy to handle at the 
distillery. 
 
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
2. Harvesting of Sugar Cane and Cane Sugar Refining 
 
Sugar cane is a plant, scientific name Saccharum officinarum . It has stiff stems 
that can reach 4m in height. The sap inside the ste ms is called the juice. It 
contains a high concentration of sugar of the type known as sucrose (cane sugar). 
More than half of the world supply of sugar is from  sugar cane that is grown 
worldwide in tropical and sub-tropical climates. 
 
Many other plants contain relatively high concentra tions of sugar. Their juice or 
molasses made from their juice is used in distiller ies worldwide. For instance, the 
sugar palm, Arenga  saccharifera , from South-East Asia has a high concentration 
of sucrose in its sap. Another example is citrus mo lasses, a co-product of the 
citrus juice industry (orange juice). Sugar beet, Beta vulgaris  is a plant that grows 
well in temperate climates. Like sugar cane it is g rown in large quantities and 
provides much of the world sugar supply.  
Only cane molasses is covered in this course of study. 
 
Large-scale sugar production from sugar cane has three products: 
•  pure sucrose 
•  plant residues such as bagasse and filter mud, and  
•  molasses. 
 
Molasses provides much of the sugar needed for the distilling industry worldwide 
and of course provides a useful source of income fo r the sugar refiners whose 
molasses can be sold to the distillers. 
 
2.1. Sugar cane growth and juice extraction 
 
Sugar cane is planted on suitable soils from cuttin gs. Each plant could have a 
useful life of between 3 and 7 years, after which it is replaced by new cuttings. 
The plants usually receive fertilisers and irrigati on to ensure a high yield of ripe 
canes. The canes are ripe when the sugar concentrat ion in the juice reaches its 
maximum value. This varies greatly with soil, clima te and water supply: the 
maximum could be in the region of 9 to 17% sucrose by weight, commonly about 
13%. 
 
When ripe, the canes are cut as close to the ground  as possible because the 
sugar concentration is high at the bottom of the ca ne. As soon as possible, the 
canes are taken to the cane milling plant in the su gar mill. It is crushed to extract 
the juice. Water is added to help the extraction. T he co-product, bagasse, plays 
no further direct role in the refining process, alt hough it may be burned to produce 
steam. At this stage, the objective for the refiner  is to collect as much sugar as 
possible from the cane. 
 
2.2. Cane sugar refining and the production of molasses 
The next objective of the sugar refiner is to colle ct as much sugar from the juice 
as is economic. 
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
Sugar mills differ in the way that they achieve thi s objective. However the basic 
principles are much the same, first the removal of suspended and soluble plant 
material by clarification and filtration, then the concentration of the liquor until 
crystals of sugar are formed and then the collection of the crystals by centrifuge. 
 
For example the basic steps involved could be: 
•  the addition of lime, (calcium hydroxide) to preci pitate plant debris 
•  heating to bring about the reactions leading to pr ecipitation 
•  settling of solids as a sludge in the clarifier 
•  removal of the sludge to the filter and return of the liquid to the product 
stream 
•  evaporating the liquid using vacuum pans 
•  allowing crystals to form the crystalliser 
•  separation of the sugar crystals from the molasses  in centrifuges and 
•  further crystallizations of sugar from the molasse s until it is not economic to 
crystallise more. 
 
The main product of this process is raw sugar and the co-product is molasses. 
As a guide to the yield obtainable: 
•  100 tonnes of cane crushed could give 11 tonnes of  raw sugar plus 3 
tonnes of molasses. 
 
Molasses contains so much sugar that microorganisms  are unable to grow in it 
although many bacteria and yeast cells can survive in it. The latter must be taken 
into account when the distiller prepares the molass es for fermentation in the 
distillery. The stability of molasses is excellent.  It can be transported in road or 
ship tankers to storage at the distillery site. It will remain usable for many months 
if not years. 
 
 
3. The Composition of Molasses  
 
3.1. The chemical analysis of molasses  
The sugar in cane molasses is mainly sucrose with s ome glucose and fructose. 
Glucose and fructose are formed by the breakdown of  sucrose during the sugar 
extraction process described above. 
It is not possible to give a typical chemical analy sis of cane molasses because of 
the variability referred to above. 
 
An example of the chemical analysis by weight of on e sample of blackstrap (cane 
molasses) is given below: 
1. sucrose ……………………………………..35% 
2. glucose plus fructose……………………...15% 
3. water………………………………………...20% 
4. other plant materials……………………….20% 
5. inorganic salts (ash)………………………..10% 
6. specific gravity………………………………1.45 
7. degrees Brix (ºBrix)………………………….85 
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
 
Analyses such as this are important to a distiller because the content of 
fermentable sugars determines how much alcohol can be produced. The 
fermentable sugars are sucrose and its breakdown products, glucose and fructose 
(the latter two sugars are sometimes called the ‘re ducing sugars’). Most strains of 
yeast can quickly ferment all three of these sugars. 
 
The gravity of the molasses gives an indication of the total solid content. As can 
be seen from the example analysis above, most of th e solids content, in this case 
50%, is dissolved sugar. However, 30% of this molasses is non-sugar material: so 
specific gravity measurements on molasses cannot give the exact sugar content. 
 
Despite this fact, it is a useful to measure specif ic gravity. This is because 
molasses must receive some treatment before it is u sed in the distillery. It is 
necessary to keep track of the specific gravity to show that pre-treatment is 
proceeding to plan. 
 
The specific gravity can be obtained quickly by using a hydrometer. This is a glass 
instrument with a floatation bulb connected to stem that has a scale of marks on it. 
The hydrometer is allowed to float in the molasses and a reading is taken on the 
scale at the level at which it settles in the molasses. 
 
There are various types of hydrometer, one of which  gives a reading of specific 
gravity directly. In the sugar industries another h ydrometer is used, the ‘Brix 
hydrometer’. In a pure sugar solution, the degrees Brix figure gives a direct 
reading of sugar concentration. For instance, a hyd rometer reading of 49 degrees 
Brix (49 ºBrix) in a pure sucrose solution indicates that the re is 49% by weight of 
sugar in the solution. In molasses there is much mo re dissolved and suspended 
matter than simply sugar, so the Brix hydrometer can not be used to find the exact 
sugar concentration of molasses: a laboratory analy sis for sugar content is also 
needed.  The Balling scale for specific gravity is used by some distillers. It is very 
similar to the Brix and Plato scales. 
 
Specific gravity varies with temperature so the tem perature of the molasses must 
be taken at the time of the hydrometer reading. A c orrection to the reading is 
added or subtracted as indicated by the Brix tables . The standard temperature for 
the Brix hydrometer readings is 20 ºC. 
 
The water content of the molasses received is of no  direct importance to the 
distiller, apart from the fact that purchased molas ses should not contain too much 
water and too little sugar. 
 
The plant materials are a complex mix of compounds originating from the cane. 
Within this mix are: 
•  a small amount of nitrogen-containing compounds th at can be used by the 
yeast to grow at the start of fermentation, 
•  the vitamins biotin and pantothenate for yeast gro wth and 
•  the vitamin thiamine for yeast fermentation. 
 
The mineral salts are also important for yeast growth and fermentation. 
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
 
3.2.  The biological analysis of molasses 
Molasses is not a sterile product; it usually conta ins live microorganisms, yeasts, 
bacteria and fungi. It is not usually necessary for  the distiller to carry out a 
biological analysis either to find out what kinds o f microorganism are present nor 
to find out how many there are. This is because: 
•  the cells present can not grow in undiluted molass es, they just remain alive 
for months or years and 
•  the molasses pre-treatments kill some of them and 
•  a rapid start to fermentation provides too much co mpetition for these 
molasses based microorganisms to have any significant effect. 
 
The reason why microorganisms cannot grow in raw (u ndiluted) molasses is that 
the osmotic pressure is too high; there is too litt le water available to the yeast or 
bacteria cells to support growth or fermentation. 
 
Two particular types of bacteria can occur in molas ses if the sugar refinery has 
problems such as long delays during production or has very poor hygiene: 
•  Leuconostoc mesenteroides  infection can cause loss of yield because it 
converts sucrose into non-fermentable dextran and 
•  Zymomonas mobilis  produces unwanted aroma compounds that can carry 
over to distilled spirit. 
 
 
4. Molasses pre-treatment (‘Mashing’) 
 
Molasses must be prepared in suitable form just bef ore fermentation. This 
process is sometimes called ‘mashing’, or it might be called ‘molasses pre-
treatment’. When the molasses has been prepared it is sometimes called ‘the 
mash’. Alternative names are ‘unfermented molasses’ or ‘molasses wort’. 
 
Pre-treatment includes some or all of the following: 
•  removal of materials to avoid contamination of the  distillation equipment 
with solids and scale 
•  diluting with water to the desired ºBrix for the start of fermentation 
•  addition of yeast nutrients to ensure a satisfacto ry fermentation 
•  adjusting the acidity level to the correct value f or the start of fermentation 
and 
•  pasteurising or sterilising the molasses just befo re fermentation. 
 
 
4.1. Removal of solids and scale-forming compounds (molasses 
clarification) 
 
There are two groups of molasses constituents that could cause handling 
problems in a distillery: 
•  various plant materials, about 20% by weight of th e molasses and 
•  dissolved salts (ash), about 10% by weight of the molasses. 
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
 
The first group could settle out or be deposited in  various parts of the plant, 
particularly in holding tanks, fermentation vessels  and the still. Such deposits 
have to be removed and this leads to extra cleaning  and increased plant 
downtime. 
 
The second group, the mineral salts, can form a har d scale in the still. The 
compound responsible for most of the scale is calci um sulphate (gypsum). If this 
is deposited on the sieve plates of a column still it reduces the size of the sieve 
plate holes. This alters the amount of contact betw een the vapour and the liquid 
on the plate that is a critically important design factor. The result is reduced 
efficiency of distillation. 
 
There are various methods for the reduction of the amount of these two types of 
material in the molasses. In the first example belo w, temperature alone is used 
and the effect is to remove some of the plant mater ial but not much of the calcium 
that leads to scaling: 
•  molasses is diluted to below 50 ºBrix and held at about 75 ºC for some hours 
and then either centrifuged to remove the solids or  the solids are allowed 
to settle out and the partially clarified molasses is decanted from the 
vessel. 
In the second treatment, the chemical addition (sul phuric acid) causes the 
formation of insoluble calcium sulphate that is removed by centrifugation: 
•  molasses at about 45 ºBrix is acidified using sulphuric acid, held at 90 ºC for 
one hour and then passed through a centrifuge. 
 
The second treatment also removes much of the plant material. 
 
4.2. Dilution of molasses to the start gravity for fermentation 
 
Yeast cannot ferment concentrated sugar so it canno t ferment molasses at its 
natural strength; the osmotic pressure is too high and there is too little water 
available to the yeast cells to support growth or fermentation. 
 
For most yeast strains, the molasses must be dilute d with water to below 25 ºBrix 
for fermentation to start. Fermentations work bette r at 22 ºBrix and better still at 
lower gravities such as 17 ºBrix for example. 
 
4.3. Addition of yeast nutrients 
 
It is often necessary to add yeast nutrients to mol asses in order to obtain a rapid 
and complete fermentation. The yeast is most likely  to need nitrogen and might 
also need some phosphate. These can both be supplie d by diammonium 
phosphate. If only nitrogen is required then ammonium sulphate can be used. 
 
Other forms of available nitrogen and phosphate can  be used with the exception 
of urea. Urea should never be used for beverage alc ohol production as it can be 
converted into ethyl carbamate, which is a carcinog en (a cancer-producing 
chemical). 
8 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
© The Institute of Brewing and Distilling, February 2009 (Version 2009)  
4.4. Adjusting acidity 
 
Fermentations have an initial acidity level at whic h they have been found by 
experience to work best. This pH value is called the ‘optimum pH’, and usually lies 
between pH 5 and pH 6. Any adjustment would be made  by adding an acid (e.g. 
sulphuric acid) to reduce the pH value or an alkali (e.g. sodium carbonate) to raise 
the pH value. 
 
 
5. Reduction of Microbial Count. 
5.1.  Pasteurising or sterilising the molasses 
If there is a strong chance that the molasses conta ins infecting micro-organisms, 
further treatment may be necessary. The diluted and  nutrient supplemented 
molasses can be given a heat treatment to reduce th e content of live bacterial 
cells before adding the yeast. 
Sterilisation is the killing of all bacteria and ye ast cells together with their spores. 
This is seldom necessary. 
The word pasteurisation is used to describe a heat treatment that produces a 
significant reduction in the number of bacteria but  does not kill them all. For 
instance holding the diluted molasses at 75 ºC for 30 minutes would severely 
reduce the level of any Lactobacilli  bacteria that might be present. 
 
Antibiotics (e.g. Penicillin) can also be used to control microbial contamination. 
 
Many distilleries do not need to use any further treatment because: 
•  the other pre-treatments have reduced sufficiently  the number of bacterial 
cells present and 
•  the most useful way of preventing the growth of in fections is for the 
fermentation conditions to be optimum and for the yeast to start fermenting 
without delay. 
 
 
 
 
 