1 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.7. Water  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 1A: Raw Materials & Preparation 
of Cereal Wort 
 
Unit 1A.7 – Water 
 
1A.7.1. Basic Quality Requirements of Water 
 
A distillery water supply should have the following characteristics: 
 
Characteristic Standard 
Appearance Clear and colourless 
Wholesomeness/Potability Freedom from taint 
Mineral salt and metallic content Contents that mee t the mashing, reducing and process 
requirements (more details later) 
Microbiological standard Reducing water must be of potable standard 
Reliability of supply There must be water available  at all times 
 
 
1A.7.2.  Production Requirements of Water in Distilleries 
 
Water is used to make distilled spirits (production  water) and is used to reduce 
(dilute) them to bottling strength (product water).  It is also used for product vessel 
cleaning and for cooling (process water). Service w ater is used in boilers, cooling 
towers and for general cleaning. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Tank 
Water 
Boiler 
house 
Distilling 
Mashing 
Reducing 
2 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.7. Water  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.7.3. Water Sourcing 
 
A plentiful supply of water is essential to the dis tillery. This is one of the reasons why 
distilleries were built in areas that had their own  sources, usually in the form of wells 
or boreholes. These original sources are still used  in some plants while others have 
to rely on the local water authority for their supply.  
 
Another factor was that in the days of waterpower, a suitable source of water to drive 
the waterwheel was required. 
 
The nature of the water source will affect the qual ity of the NMS and eventual mature 
spirit and this has resulted in some areas being fa mous for their spirit. The quality of 
the water can also affect the efficiency of the pro cesses where it is used, for example 
in boiler feed water or in plant cleaning systems. 
 
(a) Borehole Water 
 
  
Sub soil 
Top soil 
Water bearing rock 
Bore hole Rain 
Impervious rock  
Borehole water can be ‘soft’ (very little mineral c ontent) or ‘hard, carrying a high 
calcium content. 
 
(b) Surface Water 
  
Reservoir 
Rain 
 
 
Surface water usually is soft (little mineral conte nt), but may have a high organic 
content. 
3 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.7. Water  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.7.4.The Principal Characteristics and Requirements of a  
    Distillery Water Supply  
 
The source of supply will affect the characteristics of the water in the following ways: 
 
Source Mineral Salt 
Content 
Microbiological 
Content 
Taints Consistency 
of Supply 
            Bore holes Will contain 
some soluble 
material 
present in the 
rock strata 
where the 
water is held 
Likely to be low 
because the 
water has been 
filtered through 
the rock strata 
Likely to be 
low unless 
the water has 
been 
contaminated 
by surface 
water, for 
example in 
built up areas 
Very good 
over long 
periods of 
time 
Surface 
Water 
Likely to be 
low unless 
agricultural 
chemicals are 
being washed 
off the land 
Likely to be high 
because of 
contamination 
from farm land 
Likely to be 
low unless 
the water is 
contaminated 
by accidental 
spillage 
Can be 
variable 
especially in 
periods of 
drought 
Public 
Supply  
Depends on 
whether the 
source is 
borehole or 
surface. Any 
anomalies 
should be 
known if the 
supplies 
alternate 
Likely to be low 
because of 
treatment by the 
water authority 
Likely to be 
low because 
of treatment 
by the water 
authority 
Very good 
because of 
the water 
authority’s 
legal 
obligations 
 
 
(a) Production (Mashing) Water 
 
Production water used in the production of wort con tributes to the quality of the New 
Make Spirit (NMS) that is produced. 
 
Salts dissolved in the water affect the wort’s flav our. They influence the pH 
(acidity/alkalinity) of the process and the final p roduct and they could provide mineral 
for yeast growth. 
 
(b) Product Water 
 
Product water is added to the NMS to reduce its str ength to that required for filling 
into casks.  
It is the only water in the distillery production p rocess that will eventually be 
consumed by the end customer, so it must be potable. 
4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.7. Water  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
(c) Process Water  
 
Process water is that water used for: 
•  Cleaning production plant. 
•  Cooling in the condensers or worms 
 
The water must meet the requirements of the process where it is used: 
 
Water Use Problems Treatment 
Cleaning distillery 
plant (CIP) 
 Selection of a detergent that 
works best with the water in use. 
Cooling Ingress into alcohol side Ensure the mainte nance of a 
positive pressure 
 
 
(d) Service Water 
 
Service water is that water used in boilers to rais e steam, in cooling towers as part of 
the refrigeration plant and general hygiene cleaning. 
 
Boiler Water 
The main requirements for boiler water are that it does not form scale deposits on the 
heating surfaces and that it does not corrode the p lant. Consequently, the removal of 
carbonates is essential and often the standard de-i onisation process described 
above is supplemented with further treatment. 
To prevent corrosion, additives are used to scaveng e oxygen from the water and its 
pH is adjusted. 
 
Cooling Tower Water 
Water used in cooling towers is prone to the growth  of bacteria (Legionella). These 
are pathogens, which can infect people through the fine droplets formed in the plant. 
The system must be maintained in a clean condition and bactericidal additives used 
or the microorganisms controlled through electronic methods. 
 
Cooling Towers 
In some distilleries that experience a shortage of surface or borehole cooling water, 
cooling towers can be used. They operate on the pri nciple of latent heat of 
evaporation, the water partially evaporating to wat er vapour. The vapour contains 
latent heat that it has taken from the remaining li quid, which is thus cooled. As the 
vapour rises out of the tower it often condenses to  produce a cloud of fine water 
droplets, the well-known plume of electricity generating plants. 
 
           Legionella risk 
The recycled water used in cooling towers is prone to bacterial infection. A 
bacterium, Legionella , which causes pneumonia-like illness, is particula rly hazardous 
to human health because it can: 
•  Flourish in the recirculated water 
•  Leave the tower in fine water droplets 
5 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.7. Water  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
It is therefore important that the cooling tower system is 
•  maintained in a clean condition 
•  the water is regularly treated with bactericidal a gents or by other means, and 
•  tested to confirm the absence of Legionella. 
 
 
(e) General Cleaning Water 
This is water that is used for hosing down and gene ral hygiene and the normal 
standard supply can be used. 
 
 
1A.7.5. Water usage Ratios, Conservation Methods and Costs. 
 
Water is an expensive commodity, it is charged for by the Water Authority whether or 
not it comes from the distillery’s own boreholes an d the distillery is charged for any 
liquid sent down the drain if the drain is connected to a public effluent system.  
 
Consequently, knowledge of how much water is used is essential for its control.  
 (a) Usage Ratios: 
Distillers measure this as litres of water used to a litre of reduced NMS. 
 
 (b) Water conservation: 
Management of water usage can be improved as follows: 
 
Water Use Wastage Conservation 
Production 
water 
Excessive drainings from the 
Mash/Lauter Tun. 
Excessive flushing following 
product transfer.  
Measure and control the 
volumes of water used. Work at 
higher O.G. 
Product water Careless reducing Reduce to exact filling strength 
Process water Excessive flushes/rinses 
during plant cleaning. 
Unnecessary dumping of 
detergent or sterilant water. 
Leaks in cooling system  
Automate CIP systems. 
Use several short rinses rather 
than one long rinse. 
 
Plant maintenance 
Service water Loss of steam condensate. 
Leaks. 
Over use of hoses for hygiene 
cleaning. 
Water used for cooling. 
Plant maintenance. 
Supervision to ensure careful 
use. 
Use of ‘restrictors’ on hoses. 
 
All cooling water recovered and 
re-used in the most energy 
efficient way. 
6 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.7. Water  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1A.7.6. Water Treatments 
 
Some water sources require no treatment at all, so the selection of a ‘perfect’ supply 
is the ideal; however a water supply that meets all  requirements is rare and usually 
some form of water treatment is used. 
 
Quality Standard  Treatment 
Clear and colourless appearance Filtration, usually  sand filtration 
Wholesomeness/Potability - Freedom 
from taint 
Filtration, usually by carbon filtration 
Mineral salt and metallic content that 
meets the production, product and 
process requirements 
Unwanted ions removal by de-ionisation 
Freedom from any micro-organisms 
that would spoil the production, product 
or process 
Sterilisation by U.V. light or by sterile filtration 
There must be water available at all 
times 
An alternative supply is often used. Where this is 
the case, different water treatment may be needed. 
 
De-ionisation (removal of the salts) using ion-exch ange columns is used on some 
distillery sites to treat water that is used to red uce spirit’s strength. The columns 
contain special resins that are capable of exchanging the unwanted ions for harmless 
ones. The resins can be regenerated when exhausted,  usually by washing through 
with mineral acids. 
 
In the plant illustrated below, carbonates are remo ved in ion exchange columns and 
CO 2 is formed. This is removed in the degassing towers. 
 
 
Ion 
Exchange 
Column 
De- 
Gassing 
Tower 
Break 
Tank 
Acid regeneration tank 
7 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1A: Preparation of Cereal Wort: Unit 1A.7. Water  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
 
Other treatment processes include: 
 
•  Sand filtration for the removal of solids 
 
•  Carbon filtration for the removal of flavour taint s like chlorine 
 
•  Ion exchange columns for de-mineralisation or de-a lkalisation 
 
•  Membrane filters or reverse osmosis equipment for the removal of most 
contaminants including bacteria 
 
•  Removal of iron or manganese using a Birm filter. Birm is a trademark 
name for a mineral that catalyses the chemical conv ersion of soluble forms 
of iron and manganese into insoluble forms, which a re then filtered out of 
the water 
 
•  Methods of Sterilising Water; method used depends on the level of 
infection and on the subsequent use of the water.  
If the water is heavily infected it may require filtration followed by   
heat treatment. 
If it is lightly infected, sterilisation by U.V. light or by sterile filtration   
is more usual. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 