Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
1 
Institute of Brewing and Distilling 
Diploma in Distilling (Dipl. Distil.) 
 
Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort 
 
1B.1  Sources and Types of Molasses 
 
1B.1.1 Sources of molasses for the distiller 
 
Molasses (or treacle) is a thick syrup by-product from the processing of mainly 
sugarcane or sugar beet into crystalline sugar. A s ugary juice, extracted from 
harvested sugar cane plants or from sugar beet, is boiled to concentrate and 
promote the crystallization of the sugar. The resul t of the first boiling and 
removal of crystal sugar is first molasses , which has the highest sugar 
content, because comparatively little sugar has bee n extracted from the juice. 
Second molasses  is created from a second boiling and sugar extract ion, and 
has a slight bitter tinge to its taste. 
The third boiling of the sugar syrup gives blackstrap molasses . The majority of 
the sucrose from the original juice has been crysta llized, but blackstrap 
molasses is still mostly sugar by calories; however , unlike refined sugars, it 
contains significant amounts of vitamins and minera ls (such as calcium, 
magnesium, potassium and iron). 
The term “molasses” is also sometimes used to refer  to the syrups of sweet 
sorghum, citrus pulp or sugar palm, which technical ly are not “molasses” 
since no sugar crystallization has taken place from  these syrups. Similarly, 
High Test molasses, which is produced when sugar pr ices are low, has not 
had sugar crystallized from the syrup 
In this context, “molasses” is defined as the sugar -containing syrup from 
which no more sugar can be removed, or removed economically.  
 
It must be emphasized that the objective of a sugar  refiner is to make a profit 
from making and selling raw sugar. Any money made f rom molasses is a 
welcome but small contribution. When the world suga r price is very high, it 
becomes economic to recover more sugar from molasse s. This leads to the 
molasses having a different composition, lower in s ugar and higher in ash 
(dissolved salts and fibre). 
 
In contrast when the world sugar price is very low it might be necessary for 
the refiner to make a product called ‘high-test can e’ or ‘high-test molasses’. 
This is cane juice concentrated to syrup containing  about 80% by weight of 
sugar. It has a low content of yeast nutrients incl uding dissolved salts 
(sometimes called ‘ash’). The dissolved salts can b e deposited in the still 
during distillation, a process called ‘scaling’. Sc ale is not easy to remove, so 
high-test cane molasses is excellent for distillers to use. 
 
Historically, molasses was a waste product of sugar  refining and sold as 
animal fodder as a means of disposal. Rum was made from sugar cane juice, 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
2 
and still is in some parts of the world, such as Br azil where the product is 
called “Cachaça”. 
 
A distiller must always regard molasses as being wh at it is, the co-product of 
another industry. There is little or no incentive f or the producer of sugar to 
ensure that the molasses is always the same. On the  contrary, it is safer for 
the distiller to anticipate that molasses quality w ill be variable. Variations in 
molasses are caused by: 
•  variation in the sugar cane crop (soil, climate, w ater etc) and 
•  variations in the refining process (different fact ories, different process 
details, world sugar prices etc.) 
These variations may be minimised by the distillery  being located near to the 
refinery, or in some cases the same company operate s the sugar factory and 
distillery. Then there should be close communicatio n concerning the quality of 
the molasses. Otherwise, this task is done by the m olasses traders who will 
select and ship molasses from a molasses-producing region to a molasses-
using region. The traders business depends on the molasses being of suitable 
quality for the distiller. 
 
So why do distillers use molasses? 
•  Cheap source of fermentable sugar 
•  Contains some yeast nutrients 
•  Stable product, easy to store and transport 
•  Molasses can be >60% of manufacturing cost 
 
Molasses production around the world can be split geographically into two 
regions:- 
•  Tropical and sub-tropical regions producing sugar cane, sweet 
sorghum, citrus pulp and sugar palm molasses. 
•  Temperate regions producing beet molasses. 
There are a number of terms used to describe the ty pes of molasses, 
depending on the amount of crystalline sugar that h as been removed from the 
syrup.  

Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
3 
Names for molasses from successive crystallisations:- 
•  First, Mild, Light, “A” , - about 65% sucrose 
•  Second, Medium, “B”  –  about 60% sucrose 
•  Third, Dark, “C”, Blackstrap  - about 50% sucrose. The name 
“blackstrap” is derived from “black syrup”, since “ stroop” is Dutch for 
syrup. 
•  Fourth, “D” 
 
Sugar prices determine how much sugar is removed. When sugar prices are 
low High Test Molasses  may be sold instead of producing crystalline sugar. 
Importantly, the ratio of ash to sugar increases on successive crystallisations 
and this can have a substantial negative effect for the distiller.  
These grades may be sulphured or unsulphured, depen ding on whether the 
juice has been sulphured before evaporation into sy rup. The sulphuring 
“bleaches” the syrup and yields “mill white” sugar on crystallisation instead of 
the usual brown/yellow colour. This avoids the need  for further refining into 
white sugar, as well as reducing the microbial coun t in the final molasses, 
although this is of only minor concern for the sugar factory. 
 
1.3.  Molasses as a raw material for distillation 
It is usual for blackstrap molasses to be used for distillation and all 
subsequent references to molasses imply blackstrap . 
Molasses is a dark coloured syrup containing a sign ificant amount of sugar, 
often in the region of 50% by weight, giving it a specific gravity of about 1.45. 
 
The sugar content makes the syrup viscous (thick an d sticky). The viscosity is 
important because a batch of molasses that is more viscous than usual might 
be difficult to handle in the distillery. Viscosity  is much greater at low 
temperatures so it is necessary to insulate or even  heat molasses pipelines in 
climates where the minimum temperature falls below about 5 oC. 
 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
4 
1B.1.2 Sugar Cane  
 
1B.1.2.1 Environmental and agronomic factors  
 
Sugar cane, scientific name Saccharum officinarum , is a member of the grass 
family. There are many cultivars , for example  Saccharum officinarum, S. 
spontaneum, S. barberi and S. sinense. 
The sugar cane is believed to have originated in New Guinea and was known 
from about 6000 BC. It spread through Southern Asia to India and China, 
arriving in the Mediterranean circa 600 AD and reaching Spain in 715 AD. In 
1420 AD, the Portuguese took cane to Madeira and then to the Canaries, 
Azores and also to West Africa. In 1493, Christopher Columbus brought cane 
to Haiti and Dominican Republic, and in 1520s it was introduced to Central 
and South America and then to the West Indies. 
The success and growth of the sugar industry based on sugar cane has 
strong links with slavery. In the mid 18 th  century, 50,000 slaves a year were 
shipped for work in the sugar plantations of the West Indies by UK ships 
alone. In the UK, Liverpool and Bristol were the main ports importing the 
sugar and there was a “Triangular Trade”. Goods wer e shipped from the UK 
to West Africa, slaves were loaded for shipment to the West Indies, and the 
sugar was shipped to the UK and France. In1833, the Abolition of Slavery Act 
stopped this trade, but caused economic collapse in the West Indies as the 
sugar trade stopped and plantations were turned over to cocoa and other 
crops. More recently, EU subsidies to their own producers have excluded 
developing countries and dropped the world sugar price through dumping. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Growing Sugar Cane 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
5 
These have not been the only human tragedies as a result of the sugar cane 
business.  In Boston, Massachusetts in 1919, there was the Great Molasses 
Flood when a 2 million gallon tank of molasses ruptured, causing a tidal wave 
of molasses some 10m high and travelling  at 35 mph. It unfortunately 
destroyed a lot of property and 21 people were killed. 
 
 
 
Figure 2 . Cane Fields 
 
The sugar cane has stiff stems that can reach 4m in  height. The sap inside 
the stems is called the juice. It contains a high c oncentration of sugar of the 
type known as sucrose (cane sugar). About 70% of th e world supply of sugar 
is from sugar cane that is grown worldwide in about  110 countries in tropical 
and sub-tropical climates. The crop requires about 600mm of rainfall, or 
requires irrigation to achieve the same outcome. 
 
The top 10 World Producers of sugar cane are:- 
World crop – 150 Million Tonnes  
•Brazil  40 
•India  16 
•EU  15 
•China  14 
•Thailand 8 
•USA  7.5 
•Mexico 6 
•SADC 5.5 
•Australia 5 
•Pakistan 4 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
6 
Sugar cane is planted on suitable 
soils, usually from stem cuttings 
although it can be grown from seed. 
The stem cuttings have 2 or 3 nodes 
and are planted in furrows about 2m 
apart. Each plant has a useful life of 
many years (>10), after which new 
cuttings are planted to replace the old 
plants. 
 
After harvesting, the canes re-spout 
from the rootstock and the new shoots 
are called “ratoons” from the Spanish 
word. 
The plants usually receive fertilisers 
and irrigation to ensure a high yield of 
ripe canes. The fertiliser could be the 
residual liquids from the distillation 
process, dunder, and annual fertilising is importan t in ensuring continuity of 
crop from the same rootstock. 
 
One of the most destructive pests is the greyback cane grub, the larvae of the 
cane beetle ( Dermolepida albohirtum)  which can reduce yield by eating the 
roots. Similar losses can be caused by the larvae of moths and the sugarcane 
borer ( Diatraea saccharalis).  To control these pests, the cane toad has been 
introduced in some areas or alternatively chemicals such as confidor can be 
used. (The Cane toad (Bufo marinus)  was introduced into Jamaica in 1844 to 
control rats) 
Although the climate means that the sugar cane is able to grow all year round, 
it is usual to harvest cane for a fixed period of s ay 8 – 10 months, leaving a 
“silent” or “quiet” period for maintenance of the s ugar factory plant and 
harvesting equipment.   
The canes are ripe when the sugar concentration in the juice reaches its 
maximum value. This varies greatly with soil, clima te and water supply: the 
maximum could be in the region of 9 to 17% sucrose by weight, commonly 
about 13%. 
 
1B.1.2.2 Harvesting of sugar cane  
 
When ripe, the canes are cut as close to the ground  as possible because the 
sugar concentration is high at the bottom of the cane.  
For manual harvesting, The cane is set on fire to burn off leaves and to clear 
snakes, if present, from the cane field. Cutting by hand uses a cane knife or 
machete. Manual harvesting still accounts for 50% of the harvest and is the 
only method of harvesting on steep or difficult ground. 
Mechanical harvesting is obviously less labour intensive and avoids the need 
to burn off the leaves. The harvester lops off the top of the cane, cuts it at the 
base, strips the leaves, collects the cane and returns all the waste material to 
the field as a mulch and fertiliser. Mechanical harvesting is more aggressive 

Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
7 
than hand cutting, and can pull some of the rootstocks from the ground, 
requiring replanting with the same or new rootstocks.  
There is a need to process the cane within 24 hrs to avoid sugar loss. So as 
soon as possible, the canes are taken to the cane milling plant in the sugar 
mill. On leaving the cane field a sample of canes are cored, pressed and the 
juice extracted and tested for sugar content.   
 
1B.1.2. Processing of sugar cane to raw sugar and molasses.  
. 
At the sugar mill, the cane is chopped and crushed and then extracted 
countercurrent with water to recover the juice.  
The co-product, bagasse, plays no further direct role in the refining process, 
although it may be burned to produce steam. At this stage, the objective for 
the refiner is to collect as much sugar as possible from the cane. 
 
Large-scale sugar production from sugar cane has three products: 
•  pure sucrose, usually as crystalline sugar 
•  plant residues such as bagasse and filter mud, and  
•  molasses. 
 
Molasses provides much of the sugar needed for the distilling industry 
worldwide and of course provides a useful source of  income for the sugar 
refiners whose molasses can be sold to the distille rs. It is also still used as 
animal fodder and as a growth media in other indust ries, for example as the 
substrate for yeast manufacture for brewing, distilling and for flavourings. 
 
Sugar mills differ in the way that they achieve thi s objective. However the 
basic principles are much the same, first the remov al of suspended and 
soluble plant material by clarification and filtrat ion, then the concentration of 
the liquor until crystals of sugar are formed and t hen the collection of the 
crystals by centrifuge 
 
The process sequence is shown below, starting with cane juice:- 
1. Lime (calcium hydroxide) addition to precipitate  plant debris 
2. Heat to 80 - 85° C, speeds reactions, then let solids precipitate and 
separate 
3. (Bubble CO 2 through the liquid) 
4. Removal of the solids – “mud” - by centrifugatio n or clarification. 
5. Multiple effect evaporation to 60 – 80% sugar 
6. Evaporate in vacuum pans to supersaturation 
7. Seed and then crystal formation in crystalliser 
8. Centrifuge to remove crystals 
9. Repeat from step 6 above 
10. Until not economic to remove more crystals  
11. Residue is molasses 
12. May be sulphited to control infection levels and reduce colour 
The main product of this process is raw sugar and the co-product is molasses. 
As a guide to the yield obtainable: 
•  100 tonnes of cane crushed could give 11 tonnes of  raw sugar plus 3 
tonnes of molasses. 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
8 
 
Molasses contains so much sugar that micro organism s are unable to grow in 
it although many bacteria and yeast cells can survi ve. This must be taken into 
account when the distiller prepares the molasses fo r fermentation in the 
distillery. The stability of molasses is excellent. It can be transported in road or 
ship tankers to storage at the distillery site. It will remain usable for many 
months, if not years. 
 
1B.3 Sugar Beet 
 
1B.1.3.1 Environmental and agronomic factors  
 
If 70% of sugar and molasses production comes from sugar cane, then most 
of the remaining 30% comes from sugar beet. 
 Sugar beet is  root crop, Beta vulgaris, g rown in the temperate zones around 
the world from 30 - 60 °N. The crop is sown spring and harvested in the 
autumn/winter. It is a biennial plant, producing a high level of sugar in the root 
in the first season to sustain the plant through its second year when seeds 
would be produced. The beet farmer harvests the crop at the end of the first 
year when the sugar content of the root is high. 
The juice extracted from the root has high sugar content, c. 17%, which is 
higher than cane (10 – 15%) and also higher in puri ty. However, the yield of 
sugar per hectare is lower than from cane.  
The crop will grow in any soil type from sandy to clay. And it is most suited to 
be grown in crop rotation, and best yields are following wheat or barley.  High 
soil N however can significantly reduce beet quality. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The photos above show the sugar beets and a typical field planted with beets. 
Once the beets have been pulled from the ground, they can be stored 
defoliated for weeks without loss of sugar potential. Compare this to sugar 
cane, which must be processed within 24hrs of harvest to prevent sugar loss.  
 
The harvested beets are dirty and soil removal is a bigger job than for cane. 
 

Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
9 
To process the beets into sugar and molasses, they are first sliced finely and 
then soaked counter-current with clean water – a pr ocess known as diffusion 
extraction.  
The beet juice is lime treated, followed by multiple effect evaporation, vacuum 
pans, crystallisers and centrifuges as for cane juice processing. 
 
The beet molasses from the third crystallisation has only at circa 50% 
sucrose. The residues from the first and second crystallisations are called 
high green and low green respectively and are recycled. 
 
Beet juice has less cell material and less of the sugars other than sucrose. In 
comparison to cane:-  
 
Glucose Fructose Sucrose  
Cane  7%  8.5%   35.5% 
Beet  0  1.0  49.9%  
 
There is one drawback in the use of sugar beet molasses for alcoholic drinks. 
If used for rum production, it can give a “vegetable” flavour to the drink. 
However, in most countries, legislation dictates that rum must be made from 
sugar cane or its products. For example the Caribbean Community Standard 
(March 2003) – Caricom - states that:- 
Rum is a spirit drink: - 
•  Obtained exclusively by alcoholic fermentation and  distillation of sugar 
cane molasses, syrups or juices or cane sugar produced during the 
processing of sugar cane. 
•  Distilled at an alcohol content of less than 96% a bv at 20 °C 
•  Produced so that the product has the organoleptic characteristics 
derived from the natural volatile elements contained in the raw 
materials above or formed during the fermentation or distillation of the 
above raw materials 
So sugar beet, if used for alcoholic drinks, will b e processed to neutral spirit 
and then used to formulate flavoured products: the neutral spirit processing 
removing most of the spirit flavour. 
 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
10  
1B.1.4 Sweet Sorghum 
 
Sweet sorghum, Sorghum bicolor (L) Moench,  is a member of the grass 
family and in the same tribe as sugar cane. It is grown worldwide in tropical 
and sub-tropical regions, mainly as food and as a fodder crop for animals. 
 
 
 
Globally, about 70 million tonnes are grown and sorghum is the 5 th  biggest 
crop in the world after rice, wheat, maize and potatoes. 
Sorghum is a very efficient photo synthesiser, using the C4 “malate” cycle, a 
more efficient cycle in strong light intensities, used by many of the Gramineae 
such as sugar cane and maize.  
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
11  
 
Figure reproduced from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Creative_Commons 
 
C4 plants produce a 4 carbon compound, oxaloacetate, as the first product of 
photosynthesis instead of the usual 3 carbon compound, 3-phosphoglycerate. 
This means that more CO 2 is bound and available for photosynthesis and the 
binding of CO 2 can also operate at much lower atmospheric CO 2 levels. 
However, it is only effective when the light intensity is high, for example in the 
tropics. In temperate zones, C3 plants are more efficient.   
 
Sorghum is quite drought resistant, becoming dormant under adverse 
conditions, and able to resume growth after quite severe drought. It is 
therefore well suited to areas that are too dry for growing maize.  It can also 
withstand temporary water logging and flooding. However, after drought it can 
contain toxic levels of cyanide (prussic acid) and nitrites. 
Diseases of sorghum tend to be mostly leaf diseases; anthacnose caused by 
Colletotrichum graminicola , leaf blight from Helminthosporium turcicum , and 
charcoal rot from Macrophomina phaseoli.  In Africa, sorghum can be affected 
by a parasitic weed, Stiga hermonthica , which can colonise the sorghum root 
system.  However a “ trap crop” of Sudan grass, grown before the sorghum is 
planted,  can control  this weed. 
Some of the sorghum types are grown for their grain crop, whilst others are 
grown for their sugar.. 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
12  
As highlighted earlier, sweet sorghum syrup is not strictly ”molasses”, since 
no sugar is extracted, and in this respect it is similar to High Test Molasses. 
However the nomenclature of “sorghum molasses” is f requently used. 
The extraction of dry crystalline sugar from the syrup has been tried but it 
proved too difficult. 
Sorghum is used for the production of fuel alcohol and in Africa for the 
brewing of beer. It is also used for making neutral spirit, which can then be 
used as the base for alcoholic drinks. 
 
 In China, sorghum is the feedstock for maotai (baijiu), a fermented and 
distilled spirit.  
 
In order to extract its sugar, the stalks of the sorghum are squeezed to extract 
the juice. Further processing is the similar to that of sugar cane.. 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
13  
1B.1.5 Sugar Palm. 
 
Sugar is  extracted from four palm species and used for sugar production: 
1. Palmyrah palm – Borassus flabellifer 
2. Coconut palm  – Cocos Nucifera 
3. Indian Sago Palm – Caryota Urens 
4. Date palm  – Phoenix sylvestris 
 
Sugar palms grow in tropical and subtropical regions from India to the far 
East. Its main use is to produce palm sugar used in cooking. 
In all species except for the date palm, the flower buds are tapped and the 
juice allowed to run out and collected. For the date palm, its trunk is tapped to 
extract the juice. 
Sugar palm was a “wild” crop, exploited by the loca l population for its sugar 
and as a base for alcoholic drinks, but they are now being cultivated in 
plantations. The first palm sugar factory was established in 2006 in Indonesia.  
 
The molasses produced from Sugar Palm has an extract of about 60 - 70 ° 
Brix and circa 45% sugar.  
Sugar Palm juice and molasses are used to make Arrack or Lambanog. 
 
(Note: Arrack is not the same as Arak, which is an aniseed flavoured, grape 
based spirit coming from the Middle East) 
1B.1.6 Citrus Pulp 
Citrus Pulp molasses is a by-product of the citrus fruit industries in Florida and 
Brazil and it has been a major problem for juice extractors to dispose of the 
citrus peel after the juice has been squeezed. Sale of wet peel to farmers as 
animal feed is not buoyant and landfill is becoming increasingly expensive. 
One method of disposal is to press and dry the peel, making it more 
acceptable to the farmer. The press liquor can be sold to distillers at 10 - 12 ° 
Brix  if the distillery is nearby, but it is usually necessary to concentrate the 
press liquor by multiple effect evaporation at 40 –  50 ° Brix using waste heat or 
steam evaporators. It can be used at this strength, but would be concentrated 
to 70+ ° Brix if it has to be stored. This citrus peel molasses can be taken by 
the distiller to formulate citrus flavoured drinks and to produce neutral spirit. 
The molasses can also be added back to the dried peel to make an enhanced 
animal feed for the farmer. A by-product from the evaporation process is d-
limonene, which is of value as an oil for use in cosmetic fragrance, food 
flavouring, and as a solvent and a biocide.  
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
14  
1B.2. Processing of Molasses to Wort (wash) 
 
1B.2.1 Composition of molasses and its relevance to the distiller.  
The sugar in cane molasses is mainly sucrose with s ome glucose and 
fructose. Glucose and fructose are formed by the br eakdown of sucrose 
during the sugar extraction process described above. 
It is not possible to give a typical chemical analysis of cane molasses because 
of the variability referred to above. Composition o f molasses varies/depends 
on: 
•  sugar cane variety  
•  maturity of the cane  
•  climate  
•  soil type and condition 
•  processing conditions in the sugar factory  
•  storage and handling conditions 
 
An example of the chemical analysis by weight of on e sample of blackstrap 
(cane molasses) is given below:  
Typical analysis - % w/w unless stated: - 
                                                Ran ge           Good 
°Brix     75 – 88  87 
Total sugars as invert (TSAI) 50 – 58  58 
Sucrose    31 – 37  37 
Reducing sugars   13 – 20  20 
Ash (inorganic salts)  7 – 14   7 
Other plant material   20 
Nitrogen    0.4 – 1.2  1.2 
Gums     2 – 4   2.0 
pH     4.5 - 6.3  5.5 
Volatile acids ppm   500 – 25000  <5000 
F/N ratio    0.9 – 1.6  >1.0 
Sugar/Ash ratio   4 – 8   8 
Analyses such as these are important to a distiller  because the content of 
fermentable sugars determines how much alcohol can be produced. The 
fermentable sugars are sucrose and its breakdown pr oducts, glucose and 
fructose (the latter two sugars are sometimes calle d the ‘reducing sugars’). 
Most strains of yeast can quickly ferment all three of these sugars. 
 
The importance of parameters on fermentation is as follows:- 
•  An F/N ratio – Fermentable to non-fermentable matt er – of >1.2  is 
desirable, since it correlates with alcohol yield. 
•  The Ash content gives an indication of the sludge and calcium content. 
Inhibition of the yeast during fermentation and scaling deposition inside 
the stills are likely to be problems if the level is high. Levels up to 14% 
ash can are experienced. 
•  The pH is important and a pH of 4.5 is ideal for f ermentation. However 
the natural cane juice pH will be typically 5 – 5.5 , but after lime 
treatment (see later) the pH can be as high as 7 or even higher. Low 
pH can be indicative of heavy microbial infection..  
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
15  
•  The level of volatile acids can inhibit the yeast and they can cause 
fermentations to stop early if the level is as high as 0.15% butyric 
acid.Yeast inhibition can also be caused by sulphurous acid. High 
levels of SO 2 can cause a lighter coloured molasses due to “bleaching” 
and give rise to H 2S aromas on processing.  
•  °Brix or less for fermentation to proceed successfully. 
The gravity of the molasses gives an indication of the total solid content. As 
can be seen from the example analysis above, most o f the solids content is 
dissolved sugar. However, 30% of this molasses coul d be non-sugar material: 
so specific gravity measurements on molasses cannot  be used to estimate 
the sugar content. 
 
Main sugars present: - 
–Fermentable – 40 – 50% 
•Sucrose, Fructose, Glucose 
–Unfermentable – 4 – 5% 
•Galactose, Pentoses 
Other non-sugars 
–Protein 
–Carbohydrate polymers – starch, gums 
–Organic acids – acetic, propionic, valeric, butyri c 
–Waxes 
–Vitamins, 
–Salts – cations and anions 
 
Despite this fact, it is a useful to measure specif ic gravity. This is because 
molasses must receive some treatment before it is u sed in the distillery. It is 
necessary to keep track of the specific gravity to show that pre-treatment is 
proceeding to plan. 
 
The specific gravity can be obtained quickly by usi ng a hydrometer. This is a 
glass instrument with a floatation bulb connected t o a stem that has a scale of 
marks on it. The hydrometer is allowed to float in the molasses and a reading 
is taken on the scale at the level at which it settles in the molasses. 
 
There are various types of hydrometer, one of which  gives a reading of 
specific gravity directly. In the sugar industries another hydrometer is used, 
the ‘Brix hydrometer’. In a pure  sugar solution, the degrees Brix figure gives a 
direct reading of sugar concentration. For instance , a hydrometer reading of 
49 degrees Brix (49 ºBrix) in a pure sucrose solution indicates that the re is 
49% by weight of sugar in the solution. In molasses  there is a lot of dissolved 
and suspended matter, other than sugar, so the Brix  hydrometer can not be 
used to find the exact sugar concentration of molas ses. Laboratory analysis 
for sugar content is also needed. There are other % w/w sugar scales:-  
•  ° Brix is used in the wine, sugar and fruit juice industries 
•  ° Plato is used in the brewing industry 
•  ° Balling is used in the South African wine industry 
But the differences between these scales are minor 
Specific gravity varies with temperature so the tem perature of the molasses 
must be taken at the time of the hydrometer reading . A correction to the 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
16  
reading is added or subtracted as indicated by the Brix tables. The standard 
temperature for the Brix hydrometer readings is 20 ºC. 
 
The water content of the molasses received is of no  direct importance to the 
distiller, apart from the fact that purchased molas ses should not contain too 
much water and too little sugar. 
 
The plant materials are a complex mix of compounds originating from the 
cane. Within this mix are: 
•  a small amount of nitrogen-containing compounds th at can be used by 
the yeast to grow at the start of fermentation, 
•  the vitamins biotin and pantothenate for yeast gro wth and 
•  the vitamin thiamine for yeast fermentation. 
 
The mineral salts are also important for yeast growth and fermentation. 
 
1B.2.2  Microbiological spoilage organisms in molasses 
Molasses is protected against microbial spoilage by its high sugar content and 
high osmotic pressure. The only true spoilage organism of molasses is the 
Gram-positive coccus Leuconostoc mesenteroides.   Its extracellular enzyme 
dextransucrase splits fructose from sucrose molecules, and the resulting 
glucose residues spontaneously polymerise to form dextran, a viscous 
polysaccharide which can block pipes.  This leaves an unusually high level of 
fructose relative to the free glucose present and can be used as an indication 
that dextran might have been formed.  
However, the following micro-organisms are sufficiently resistant to the 
osmotic pressure of cane juice and molasses to grow slowly in storage, and 
may affect the flavour of rum prepared from contaminated material.  The 
bacterium Zymomonas mobilis is associated with production of off-flavours, 
particularly H 2S, and, although some strains of the yeasts such as 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe  and Zygosaccharomyces rouxii  provide a 
welcome contribution to flaviour complexity, other strains are also associated 
with off-flavours which distil into the final spirit.  Saccharomyces cerevisiae  
strains are often present in cane juice and molasses and are important for 
“natural” fermentations. 
 
Molasses is not a sterile product; it usually conta ins live microorganisms, 
yeasts, bacteria and fungi. It is not usually neces sary for the distiller to carry 
out a biological analysis either to find out what k inds of microorganism are 
present or to find out how many there are. This is because:- 
•  the cells present can not grow in undiluted molass es, they just remain 
alive for months or years and 
•  the molasses pre-treatments kill some of them and 
•  a rapid start to fermentation provides too much co mpetition for these 
molasses based microorganisms to have any significant effect. 
 
The reason why microorganisms cannot grow in raw (u ndiluted) molasses is 
that the osmotic pressure is too high; there is too  little water available to the 
yeast or bacteria cells to support growth or fermentation. 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
17  
 
Two particular types of bacteria can occur in molas ses if the sugar refinery 
has problems such as long delays during production or has very poor 
hygiene: 
•  Leuconostoc mesenteroides  infection can cause loss of yield because 
it converts sucrose into non-fermentable dextran and 
•  Zymomonas mobilis  produces unwanted aroma compounds that can 
carry over to distilled spirit. 
 
 
1B,2.3 Molasses pre-treatment  
 
Molasses must be prepared in suitable form just bef ore fermentation. This 
process is sometimes called ‘mashing’, or it might be called ‘molasses pre-
treatment’. When the molasses has been prepared it is sometimes called ‘the 
mash’. Alternative names are ‘unfermented molasses’  or ‘molasses wort or 
wash’. 
 
Pre-treatment includes some or all of the following: 
•  dilution with water to say 55 ºBrix to reduce viscosity  
•  removal of materials to avoid contamination of the  distillation 
equipment with solids and scale 
•  pasteurising, at say 75 ºC,  the molasses before fermentation or 
sterilising the molasses. 
•  adjusting the acidity to neutralise the lime, to a id clarification and to set 
the pH level to the correct value for start of fermentation, say 4.5 – 5 
•  clarification in centrifuges or clarifiers 
•  diluting with water to the desired ºBrix, say 14 ºBrix, for the start of 
fermentation 
•  cooling to the fermentation temperature 
•  addition of yeast, from propagator or “bubbing” ta nk 
•  addition of yeast nutrients to ensure a satisfacto ry fermentation 
 
Molasses clarification involves the removal of soli ds and scale-forming 
compounds. The types of compounds present and the p rocessing for their 
removal are as follows:- 
 
There are two groups of molasses constituents that could cause handling 
problems in a distillery: 
•  various plant materials, about 20% by weight of th e molasses and 
•  dissolved salts (ash), about 10% (but up to 14%) b y weight of the 
molasses. 
 
The first group could settle out or be deposited in  various parts of the plant, 
particularly in holding tanks, fermentation vessels  and the still. Such deposits 
have to be removed and this leads to extra cleaning  and increased plant 
downtime. 
 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
18  
The second group, the mineral salts, can form a har d scale in the still. The 
compound responsible for most of the scale is calci um sulphate (gypsum). If 
this is deposited on the sieve plates of a column s till, it reduces the size of the 
sieve plate holes. This alters the amount of contac t between the vapour and 
the liquid on the plate, which is a critically impo rtant design factor. The result 
is reduced efficiency of distillation. 
 
There are various methods for the reduction of the amount of these two types 
of material in the molasses.  
In the first example below, temperature alone is us ed and the effect is to 
remove some of the plant material but not much of t he calcium that leads to 
scaling: 
•  molasses is diluted to below 50 ºBrix and held at about 75 ºC for some 
hours and then either centrifuged to remove the solids or the solids are 
allowed to settle out and the partially clarified m olasses is decanted 
from the vessel. 
In the second treatment, the chemical addition (sul phuric acid) causes the 
formation of insoluble calcium sulphate that is removed by centrifugation: 
•  molasses at about 45 - 55 ºBrix is acidified using sulphuric acid, held at 
90 ºC for one hour and then passed through a centrifuge or clarifier/s 
 
The second treatment also removes much of the plant  material and both 
treatments simultaneously achieve pasteurisation on  account of the elevated 
temperatures used. . 
 
Dilution of molasses to the start gravity for ferme ntation has to be done since 
yeast cannot ferment concentrated sugar. The osmoti c pressure is too high 
and there is too little water available to the yeas t cells to support growth or 
fermentation. 
 
For most yeast strains, the molasses must be dilute d with water to below 
25 ºBrix for fermentation to start. Fermentations work better at 22 ºBrix and 
better still at lower gravities such as 17 ºBrix, or even at 14 ºBrix for example, 
yielding 6 – 7% abv in the final wash. However this  must be offset against the 
increased costs of distilling a lower alcoholic strength wash. 
 
In order to increase the final wash alcoholic stren gth, but holding the initial 
starting gravity to say 14 ° Brix, incremental feeding can be used and this can  
lead on to either a semi-continuous or continuous operation. 
For example:- 
•  Start the fermentation at say 14 ° Brix 
•  Feed with diluted molasses at 35 ° Brix, keeping the FV contents 
between 12 and 14 ° Brix until the vessel is full. 
•  Allowing overflow into one or more vessels, can cr eate continuous or 
semi-continuous operation  
Type Yeast conc 
x 10 8 
Retention 
time hrs 
Advantages Disadvantages 
Batch 1 30 – 45 Good control, 
easy to 
manipulate and 
High cost, many 
FVs, pumps and 
pipes 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
19  
calculate yields 
Semi-
continuous 
3 16 – 24 Lower costs, 
possible to 
recycle yeast 
Difficult to 
calculate yields, 
and to control 
contamination 
Continuous  8 28 - 32 High yields and 
efficiency, low 
costs and 
flexibility  
Difficult 
technically to 
control, not 
suitable for 
smaller plants 
 
Figure 5 Comparison of fermentation regimes. 
Adapted from V. Persad-Doodnath, Angostura Ltd, Trinidad, WDSC 2005 
It is often necessary to add yeast nutrients to mol asses in order to obtain a 
rapid and complete fermentation. The molasses nitro gen content can be as 
low as 0.4%, so the yeast is most likely to need ni trogen and might also need 
some phosphate. These can both be supplied by diamm onium phosphate, but 
this is an expensive additive. If only nitrogen is required then ammonium 
sulphate can be used, which is considerably cheaper, but as a sulphate, it can 
increase the likelihood of scale deposition. (The s olubility of calcium sulphate, 
for example, decreases with increasing temperature and with increasing 
alcohol content. Compare this with sodium chloride,  whose solubility 
increases with rising temperature).. 
 
Other forms of available nitrogen and phosphate can  be used with the 
exception of urea. Urea should never be used for beverage alcohol production 
as it can be converted into ethyl carbamate, which is a carcinogen (a cancer-
producing chemical). 
 
Liquid ammonia addition should also be avoided since it can raise the pH. 
 
High Test Molasses may also be deficient in B vitamins,  biotin, pantothenate 
and inositol. 
 
Beet molasses can be deficient in biotin, so cane molasses at 20 – 50%  is 
often used, since cane molasses is rich in biotin. 
Beet molasses is rich in pantothenate, so beet molasses could be used to 
supplement cane molasses that are borderline for pantothenate, provided 
there are no detrimental flavour effects from the beet molasses. 
 And finally, yeasts can be selected that do not require inositol or the addition 
of pantothenate. 
 
Fermentations have an initial acidity level at whic h they have been found by 
experience to work best. This pH value is called the ‘optimum pH’, and usually 
lies between pH 5 and pH 6. Any adjustment would be  made by adding an 
acid (e.g. sulphuric acid) to reduce the pH value o r an alkali (e.g. sodium 
carbonate) to raise the pH value. 
 
Molasses will contain infecting microorganism and a  heat treatment is usually 
given to reduce the content of live bacterial cells before adding the yeast. 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
20  
Sterilisation is the killing of all bacteria and ye ast cells together with their 
spores. This is seldom necessary. 
The word pasteurisation is used to describe a heat treatment that produces a 
significant reduction in the number of bacteria but  does not kill them all. For 
instance holding the diluted molasses at 75 ºC for 30 minutes would severely 
reduce the level of any Lactobacilli  bacteria that might be present. 
 
Antibiotics (e.g. Penicillin) have also been used t o control microbial 
contamination, but the indiscriminate use of antibi otics is now not favoured 
due to the possibility of developing antibiotic resistant bacterial strains. 
 
Some distilleries may not need to use any further treatment because: 
•  the other pre-treatments have reduced sufficiently  the number of 
bacterial cells present and 
•  the most useful way of preventing the growth of in fections is for the 
fermentation conditions to be optimum and for the y east to start 
fermenting without delay. 
 
Due to the lime treatments and processing applied by the sugar refiner, the 
distiller has little or no control over the scale forming potential of the molasses 
as delivered to the distillery. There are therefore some important pre-
treatments for tackling the problem of scaling: 
•  Pre-treatment by sulphuric acid precipitation does n’t work well since 
sulphate is not totally insoluble. 
•  Using phosphoric acid instead of sulphuric will form a soft sludge rather 
than hard scale. Similarly HCl can be used for pH control instead of 
H2SO 4 
•  Dilute to 45 ° Brix with hot water and hold at 70 °C for a few hours – 
solids settle out and this also makes the molasses easier to pump. 
•  Ensure sediments are left in the fermenter, by usi ng steep cone angle 
and/or several outlets 
•  Similarly in the wash tank/beer well – leave sedim ents behind. 
•  Column design – choose plates less susceptible to scaling – e.g. disc 
and do-nut trays. 
•  Add chelating agents to the wash. The addition of phosphonate based 
chemicals, so called “threshold chemicals”, to the fermented wash is 
very effective at forming a soft sludge rather than a hard scale.  
 
1B.2.4   Pitching of yeast and bacteria 
 
The selection of pitching yeast and bacteria has changed in recent years and 
depends in part on the type of product that is being produced.  
 
Light rum:  A strong complex flavour is not required; therefore either a single 
strain or perhaps two complementary pure cultures of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae  are used.  The principal requirements are tolerance of the initial 
osmotic pressure, high alcohol yield, tolerance of fermentation temperature up 
to at least 33 oC and an acceptable profile of flavour compounds. 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
21  
Antibiotics, chlorine dioxide, Quats, ammonium bifluoride may be used to 
control bacteria and acid washing of yeast at pH 2 also used if yeast recycling 
systems are in use 
Dark rums: Much of the strong flavour of dark rum develops during 
fermentation.  There are several ways of achieving an acceptably complex 
flavour.  Traditionally, a spontaneous fermentation by the naturally occurring 
yeasts and bacteria of the molasses, supplemented by fermented stillage 
(“dunder” in Caribbean terminology) provided the ra nge of microorganisms to 
produce the range of flavour congeners that were considered desirable.  What 
was essentially a continuous fermentation in dunder pits provided a rich 
mixture of fermentative yeasts and anaerobically growing bacteria flora, of 
which saccharolytic butyric acid-forming clostridia and lactic bacteria were 
important components.  The value of butyric and lactic acids to rum flavour is 
the ethyl and other esters that develop during fermentation and maturation, 
rather than the actual acids.  However, incorporation of dunder is now 
unusual; use of pure cultures originally derived from dunder is more common. 
Fermentations are fast and cooling is required to keep top-heat below 33 °C 
 
The naturally occurring microorganisms of the molasses are still used in some 
distilleries as the only inoculum.  Since spontaneous fermentations contain 
many different yeast and bacterial species they produce an interesting flavour 
profile, and of course it is not necessary to purchase the yeast culture.  
However, the distiller has no control over the composition of the inoculum, 
and for large-scale production that is unacceptable.  So the trend now is to a 
more carefully prepared mixture of bacteria and yeasts and therefore more 
precise control of flavour production.  There may be some distilleries that 
ferment by Saccharomyces cerevisiae  alone, using a mixture of strains known 
to produce the desired flavour congeners.  However, incorporating pure 
cultures of known rum strains of Schizosaccharomyces pombe,  Clostridium 
saccharobutyricum  and perhaps lactic bacteria originally isolated from dunder 
gives strong but reproducible flavour production in successive fermentations. 
 
 
 
 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
22  
Unit1B.3 Laboratory Analysis 
 
1B.3.1 Basic Concepts 
 
(a) Sampling Error 
The purpose of sampling is to make some estimate of a property of the bulk 
material without examining the whole of it. A large bulk will generally require a 
large sample and, for a small bulk, consideration should be given as to 
whether the analysis requires a destructive or non-destructive technique. The 
sample must also be representative of the bulk as precise laboratory analysis 
of non-representative samples may give seriously misleading information. 
 
In-line analysis allows the whole of the bulk to be examined but these 
methods are frequently less accurate than laboratory techniques and are 
probably best used as a screening process control procedure. 
 
The properties of some materials, such as plastic mouldings used in 
packaging, change after manufacture and such products should be sampled 
and examined when their properties have stabilised. Conversely some 
materials, such as wort, deteriorate rapidly after sampling and care should be 
taken to ensure they are examined soon after the sample has been taken. 
 
Bulk samples must be homogeneous before a representative sample can be 
removed and this is particularly difficult,  for example in fermentation, where 
yeast growth or sedimentation may be taking place. 
 
Further details of sampling procedures for specific areas of interest can be 
found in the relevant IOB, ASBC and EBC Analytical Method Manuals. 
 
(b) Accuracy and Precision 
Accuracy is defined as the ability of an analytical method to provide results 
equal to the true valve. 
Precision is a general term to describe the amount of variation in a method. 
The differences between accuracy and precision are best illustrated in a 'dart 
board' type of diagram shown in Fig.1 where it can be seen that the best 
measurements are both accurate and precise. 
 
(c) Repeatability (r95) 
Repeatability (r95) can be used as an internal laboratory method check. 
Repeated analysis of the same sample, by the same analyst using the same 
equipment at the same time will give results that fall within the stated 
range95% of the time, or 19 analyses in 20. 
 
(d) Reproducibility (R95) 
Reproducibility can be used as a between laboratories method check. 
Repeated analysis of the same sample by different analysts using different 
equipment at different times will give results that fall within the stated range 
95% of the time, or 19 analyses in 20. R 95 is usually greater than r95.. 
 
 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
23  
Figure 1 – Accuracy and Precision 
 
 
 ( e) Specification Ranges (Tolerances) 
When specification ranges are set, allowance must be made not only for 
analytical errors but also for process capability and errors derived from 
sampling and averaging. Analytical errors are usually well documented in the 
relevant methods manuals and can provide a conservative guide to the 
minimum specification ranges required. 
 
To estimate the total errors involved, two approaches are described in the IOB 
methods, Statistical Section, one based upon Statistical Process Control 
Theory and the other derived from BS4306 (ISO4259). 
 
(It should be noted that BS4306 is restricted to petroleum products only, 
which are, in general, homogeneous products in which serious sampling 
problems do not arise). 
 
Using Statistical Process Control Theory variations within a process are 
usually assumed to be distributed normally about the mean. The spread of 
variation is represented by the standard deviation, sigma, and from statistical 
theory 99.7% of all the actual values will be in the range 6 x sigma. 
 
The specification range, the interval between upper (A2) and lower (A1) must 
therefore equal or exceed 6 x sigma. The ratio of the specification band width 
to 6 x sigma is termed the process capability (Cp). 
 
Cp = A1 – A2         (1) 
Sigma 
 
* *
* * ** ** 
* *
A c c u r a t e Pr e c is e  a n d  a c c u r a t e 
*
   **    * ** ** 
*
*
I m p r e c is e  a n d  in a c c u r a t e Pr e c is e  b u t  in a c c ur a t e 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
24  
A Cp value of 2 is usually recommended as the minimum acceptable value in 
the construction of specification bands. 
 
Using BS 4306, specification limits should be expressed as 'not less than' or 
'not greater than'. 
Limits may be either: 
a double limit, upper and lower 
a single limit, upper or lower. 
 
The value chosen for the specification limit should take into account R(95) for 
the method and for a double limit the specified range should not be less than 
4 x R(95) 
. 
(f) Simple Probability Calculations - Normal Distribution, Standard 
Deviation, Variance 
A normal distribution of values around a mean can be demonstrated by a 
Symmetrical curve as shown below 
The spread of the values, and the curve, is given by the standard deviation 
(SD). Where : 
68% of all observations lie within Mean ± 1 Standard deviation (M ±1SD) 
95% of all observations lie within Mean ± 2 Standard deviations (M ±2SD) 
 
SD is defined by the formula:- 
 
SD = √  [(x1 – x) 2 / (n – 1)] 
 
where x1 = the individual result 
x = the mean result 
n = number of results 
For a distribution curve as shown in the above graph approximately 68% of 
the values lie within ± 1SD, 95% within ± 2SD and 99.7% within ± 3SD. 
 

Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
25  
(g). The Relevance of Inter-Laboratory Collaborative Checks 
The purpose of interlaboratory checks is to ascertain whether the results from 
a laboratory for a particular analysis are acceptable when compared with 
other laboratories using the same or possibly different methods. 
 
All proficiency schemes should have their own protocol, which should be 
available for examination. 
 
The major proficiency scheme for the brewing industry is the Brewing 
Analytes Proficiency Scheme (BAPS) that is run jointly by the Laboratory of 
the Government Chemist (LGC) and the Brewing Research International 
(BRI). Since many brewing companies also have distilling interests, the 
scheme can be equally useful in distilling, since many of the determinations 
made in brewing are the same as those in distilling, particularly at the front 
end of the process. 
 
Samples of a single beer are distributed every four weeks and participants 
analyse on an optional basis for analytes that are of particular relevance or 
interest. 
 
A microbiological development of BAPS is also available. 
 
Other relevant inter-laboratory check schemes are the Distilling Analytes 
Proficiency Scheme (DAPS) and the Independent Laboratories Collaborative 
Scheme (ILCS). The DAPS scheme uses robust statistics in which the mean 
is replaced by the median and the standard deviation by the Median of 
Absolute Differences (MAD) from the sample median. This is then multiplied 
by 1.483 to make it equivalent (MAD) to the standard deviation in the normal 
distribution. 
 
Results are reported in terms of Z – scores 
 
Z score =   X 1 - assigned value   
established standard deviation. 
 
The proficiency of a laboratory is judged by the absolute value of its Z – score 
using the following criteria – 
 
Z < 2 = Satisfactory 
2< Z <3 Questionable 
Z > 3 = Unsatisfactory 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
26  
1B.3.2. Analytical Techniques 
 
The syllabus requires knowledge of standard methods for the routine 
analyses. 
It is suggested that you familiarise yourself with these, so that you could 
replay the principles at least, if not the precise detail, of a method in the 
examination. 
The syllabus asks for “the basic principles of analytical techniques…” 
 
The principles of analytical techniques for molasses and molasses wort . 
 
Sugar content by hydrometer (saccharometer) 
The specific gravity can be measured by hydrometer as ° Brix = % w/w. 
However due to the high level of ash and plant material present, specific 
gravity is not a direct indication of sugar content. 
 
It is also possible to measure using refractive index – 20° C and 589.3 nm. 
Note:  
° Brix used in wine, sugar and fruit juice industries 
° Plato use in the brewing industry 
° Balling used in the South African wine industry 
But the differences between these scales are minor  
Total sugars as invert (TSAI) - Lane Eynon method 
Measures sample-reducing power and assumes all reducing compounds are 
sugars. This will overestimate the sugars present particularly if the molasses 
are sulphured and a lot of SO 2 is present. 
Copper (II) in Fehling’s solution is reduced to copper (I) and forms a red 
precipitate of oxide and decolourisation of a methylene blue indicator. 
 
R-C=0 + 2CuO + 2OH    R-C=O + Cu 2O + H 2O 
    I        I 
   H                                          OH   
 
Total reducing sugars expressed as % w/w “as glucose” or “as invert” 
depending on the Lane and Eynon factors used 
Calcium may complex with glucose and fructose, but this can be avoided by 
sequestering the calcium with EDTA. 
There are alternative methods using different reagents:- 
•  Fehling’s solution – copper sulphate in alkaline t artrate – red precipitate 
•  Benedict’s solution – copper sulphate in alkaline citrate – red 
precipitate 
•  Tollen’s solution – silver nitrate in aqueous ammo nia – silver mirror 
 
The reducing sugars measured by the above method include all 
monosaccharides -glucose, fructose – and the disacc harides lactose and 
maltose (although maltose will not be present in molasses wort) 
 
 
 
Total sugars as sucrose (TSAS) 
Dipl. Distil. Module 1B: Preparation of Molasses Wort  
 
© The Institute of Brewing & Distilling (Dipl.Distil. 1 Revision Notes Version 1, November 2009)  
27  
The anthrone reagent reacts with sugars in acidic (sulphuric acid) conditions 
to give a green-blue colour. This colour is then measured by 
spectrophotometer at 620nm. 
The method measures reducing and non-reducing sugars due to the strong 
oxidising power of the sulphuric acid 
However, HPLC is now the most common method and gives values for the 
individual sugars 
 
Total Nitrogen 
Nitrogen level is a measure of the protein content of the molasses and is 
determined by the following: protein %  = 6.25 x nitrogen content % and 
typical levels of protein in molasses will be about 4%. 
 
There are two methods used for total nitrogen determination. 
 
Dumas Method 
The sample is pyrolysed at 950° C in pure oxygen and carried by a 
helium carrier gas. After removal of moisture, oxygen and carbon 
dioxide, the nitrous oxides are reduced to nitrogen by a  hot copper 
wire and the nitrogen measured  by a thermal conductivity detector. 
 
Kjeldahl Method 
The sample is digested in hot sulphuric acid in the presence of 
catalysts to give ammonium sulphate. The solution is made alkaline 
with sodium hydroxide and the released ammonia distilled off in the 
presence of an excess of boric acid solution. The ammonia is then 
titrated with standard acid. 
 
Volatile Acidity 
Most acids are less volatile than ethanol and will be left in the pot at the end of 
distillation. Volatile acids important in reaction with ethanol and other alcohols 
to form flavour active esters. Volatile acids are measured by GC.  
Dry matter content 
The sample is dried in a vacuum oven at 65° C for 18 hours, using very pure 
sand as an extender. 
 
END OF MODULE 1B  
 
 
 
 